11 things most people don't know about health insurance
When people have health insurance, financial barriers to receiving health care are lifted and they   use of services, which can be a great thing — diseases caught early can be better managed and treated. With insurance,  A lot of what we know about health insurance comes from the  , an experiment from the 1970s where people were randomly assigned health coverage that required different levels of out-of-pocket spending. People with more generous insurance — which meant they were on the hook for less of the cost themselves — consumed more health care, but it was greater use of  "valuable" and "wasteful" care. When people have fewer barriers to the emergency room, they will visit it more often. This means more "inappropriate" use of the ER, too — going there for problems that aren't actually emergencies and are better handled through a typical doctor's appointment. This trend could be stronger among people who face barriers to health care other than affordability. A study published in Health Affairs   that low-income individuals who use the emergency room inappropriately often attach a high "time cost" to regular doctor check-ups. In other words: it was more difficult for them to arrange time away from work, child care, transportation, and the like. Some people also believe that they can receive higher-quality care in the emergency room than from a primary care doctor. Health insurance makes medical care more affordable, but doctor trips are hardly the only factor that can influences outcomes.  , defined by the CDC as "the circumstances in which people are born, grow up, live, work, and age," also play a huge — albeit less clearly understood — role in health. Health insurance does little to change those circumstances. To move the needle on social determinants of health, we should look to social services like education, child care, and cash and food assistance. The chart below is adapted from a   by Elizabeth Bradley, a professor at Yale's School of Public Health. Other developed countries actively invest in social services, spending nearly twice as much on those relative to direct health care. The United States inverts that ratio; for every dollar spent on health care, we only spend 56 cents on social programs. There's a pretty broad consensus that health insurance alleviates financial hardship from catastrophic medical expenditures. The best evidence to date on this is from an expansion of Medicaid in Oregon, where Medicaid enrollment was allocated to certain low-income individuals through a lottery. This created conditions that mimicked a randomized controlled trial, the gold standard in research. One year after receiving coverage, Oregon's Medicaid recipients were   less likely to need to borrow money or skip payments on other bills to afford medical care, compared to the uninsured control group. At two years out, the Medicaid enrollees were   less likely than the uninsured to report catastrophic medical expenses. Whether insurance actually puts a dent in medical   is  . For example, one   found that rates of medical bankruptcy didn't decline following Massachusetts's 2006 health reform, as we might expect, but the recession may have confounded the study's findings. A   from Rice University found that people with health insurance are consistently more likely to report better health, regardless of income, education, age, and ethnic background. Half of people with health insurance said their health was "excellent" or "very good"; only 35 percent of uninsured respondents reported the same. That association between insurance and reported health status isn't enough to suggest a causal relationship. Findings from Oregon's Medicaid expansion are: those who were randomized to Medicaid coverage were significantly more likely to report better physical health   and   years after receiving coverage.The Medicaid enrollees also reported substantially better   compared to those who didn't receive coverage. Following the introduction of Romneycare, mortality in Massachusetts   relative to similar counties in other states. This suggests that for every 830 people insured, one death is prevented.  This is also evidence of insurance having a  . An insurance card cannot reduce death all by itself; diseases have to be better treated, managed, or prevented first. There is an extensive amount of research documenting variation in the quality of care received by Medicare beneficiaries — who are, by definition, all insured. A lot of this variation is geographic in nature, suggestion that there are regional patterns in how medicine is practiced, and some regions provide better care than others. Health insurance goes a long way toward making health care more  , but  The nation is short on doctors, and the doctors we do have tend to   in areas that already have high physician capacity; not coincidentally. Regions classified as " " are going to face particular strain when coverage rates increase and more people try to schedule medical appointments. There are also temporal, geographic, and cultural barriers to care. When physicians keep 9 to 5 hours, working adults might struggle to fit an appointment into their schedule. Geographic accessibility can be a hindrance, particularly in rural regions or where an individual doesn't have access to reliable transportation. And, for some patients, cultural factors influence the relative "acceptability" of a provider. Insurance can't solve a problem that's incredibly fundamental to our health spending problems: spending is distributed across different patients in a radically unequal fashion. About 5 percent of patients are responsible for half of all health spending. Meanwhile, the cheapest 50 percent of patients account for less than 3 percent of spending. Here's what that looks like as a chart: Expanding coverage isn't likely to change  . Other health reforms — changing how we pay for care, not just who we cover — hold much more promise. Obamacare's primary objective is to extend affordable coverage to millions of people for whom insurance was out of financial reach. It has some elements intended to contain cost growth, too —  , the  , the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation — but the bulk of the law concerns itself with expanding coverage. This is by design. Back in 2010, health economist Len Nichols authored a thoughtful   on the logic behind this move: Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 