What the VA scandal tells us about health care rationing
Henry Aaron: Most of this comes from reading the papers, but my understanding is that they've had a lot more to do because we've had wars and a lot of people coming back who are damaged, and need help. Of necessity, where they were put in a situation where they had to exclude certain classes that were previously admitted. It seems they decided they would go through it in an inappropriate fashion, and got themselves in a very bad position. HA: When resources are inadequate, you have to engage in triage of some sort or another. From what I'm gathering in these news reports, they've chosen a particularly unfortunate way of dealing with it. Unfortunate is probably too gentle — stupid is probably a better word. The rationing in Britain started with the general practitioners, who would realize there wasn't capacity to take their patients further along in the system, so they would have different standards for referring them for tertiary care. You would have dialysis clinics that were in fact part of a system that was pretty brutally rationing, and patients might never get to them. Here, you have the combination of veterans coming back from Iraq and Afghanistan in addition to the increasingly flow of problems from the Vietnam years and the aging of that population. HA: The comparison to the IPAB is, to put it mildly, premature. CBO a couple of years ago said they didn't think anything would happen with IPAB for the next few years since costs have been coming in below costs. Even if members get nominated and appointed, both of which seem remote at a present time, those limits are not going to bite and they're not going to bite hard. HA: The comparison of the IPAB and VA is not helpful at this point. The VA, even back a decade ago, when it was getting all this good press, wasn't able to take care of the entire population who was legally eligible to receive services. Medicare is, and I think virtually everybody recognizes this, part of an overall system where virtually everybody who is a candidate for care gets care. [With all the veterans coming back from war now,] it would be like having IPAB set a budget that was in existence for Medicare, and then all of a sudden being told they had to cover the aged population of China in addition to the United States population. That would create chaos. What looks to have happened at the VA is its had a lot of problems dumped on it, with some additional resources. The US health-care system spends a lot more than other countries do, but let's just suppose a nuclear war occurred and it dumped millions of millions of people into the system. It would break down for a lack of resources. That isn't what happened in a quantitative sense to the VA but, in a qualitative sense it mirrors what's going on. HA: It is usually a political process that sets the budget, when you look at other countries. There is some evidence they do it in a way that may produce somewhat fewer services, but do it in a way that commands general, societal support. There are many people who feel that's the wrong way to about things, that it should be set up more through a market process. then there are others who argue that markets don't function well, in the health care system. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 