Kids who get health insurance are more likely to finish high school and college
We know health insurance influences health — but can it change educational outcomes, too? A new study says yes. The  , recently published by the National Bureau of Economic Research, examined   has demonstrated a positive short-term relationship between access to health care and education — when schools offer health care services to students, attendance rates rise and teen pregnancies fall — but this paper is the first to look at educational impacts over a longer time frame. Two things could cause access to health insurance to influence educational achievement. The first is pretty straightforward — access to insurance could make kids healthier and healthier kids could do better in school. But there's also a potential indirect effect — giving families health insurance could increase the financial resources they have available for non-health expenses, and   could help kids do well in school. The way the study is constructed doesn't let us tell how much of the impact is coming from the insurance per se and how much is simply the financial benefit. The families affected by these insurance expansions are the same families that have shown the   in educational attainment over the last three decades. Moreover, the authors write, "part of the return to these expansions is a potential reduction in inequality and higher economic growth that stems from the creation of a skilled workforce." Childhood uninsurance isn't the problem it once was, but about   of kids remained uninsured in 2013. The majority of these children — an estimated 70 percent — are actually eligible for coverage through Medicaid or CHIP (a public insurance program for children that falls under Medicaid's umbrella). It's estimated that Obamacare will reduce the number of uninsured children by  . That number probably isn't as high as we'd like — but the long-term impact on the newly-insured might be better than we expected. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 