Obamacare supporters are turning on the employer mandate
The left-leaning Urban Institute put out last month, making the case that killing the employer mandate would reduce insurance coverage by a tiny 0.07 percent. And earlier today, a relatively prominent Obamacare supporter wrote   for the journal  advocating for scraping the provision. Washington & Lee University Law Professor Timothy Jost does, however, have a slightly different take on the issue: he thinks Congress should replace the current employer mandate with  of health reform. That would require companies to devote a certain percent of their payroll to health benefits, rather than tethering fines to each worker. Jost and I spoke Wednesday morning about why he would like to see the employer mandate scrapped, what's been learned from its implementation and what a replacement could look like. Timothy Jost: I've been following the implementation regulations all along. One thing that has struck me over and over again is how incredibly complicated the employer mandate is. The reporting requirements, the determining who is a large employer, who is small, who is full time and part time is all a pretty burdensome operation And I think the Urban Institute paper really raises the question of is it worth the effort? What are we getting out of all the time and resources being invested in this? TJ: It looked pretty complicated to begin with. It's become clearer and clearer over time that its a heavy lift, I'd say. One thing that I think has become clear, and don't think it was clear to many people at first, is how little it actually gets you because of the skinny benefits that employers and still be considered to fulfill the mandate. Then there's also the  where  you have the possibility of companies offering insurance to the individual, and not the family, but still counted as fulfilling the mandate. That, in my view, was a misinterepation of the law. But either way, I think there's a whole series of issues here that could be improved by simply getting rid of the employer mandate and replacing it with an easier to administer version result. TJ: It would require companies, as I understand it, to spend 8 percent of their payroll on health benefits.  For smaller companies, it would be a smaller percentage. It was a graduated thing, that if your payroll was under a half million dollars, or some benchmark, you would pay a smaller percentage. I don’t know if that’s the right percent. But it's just a much simpler thing to administer with some very basic requirements. And it would get rid of the problem of people trying to evade the regulations. It also works out so the amount of revenue generated was estimated at the time to be $135 million [which is similar to revenue generated by the current policy]. TJ: I think my conclusion is a bit different than Urban's. I don't think that's a good idea because the employer mandate does in fact get us some things. It will increase the number of people covered and generates a huge amount of revenue. I don't think we should just repeal it, but we should be looking for alternatives that could accomplish more or less the same result without imposing anything like the same burden. It's also worth pointing out that Urban's estimates are slightly different than the CBO. Urban estimated the number of uninsured would increase by about 200,000 without the employer mandate. CBO projected about 500,000 to 1 million. A million is a much bigger number. TJ: Congress would have to take action. I should say, I have not discussed this with anyone in the administration and do not have any reason to have any reason to believe the official position of the administration. At the same time, their action in implementing the employer mandate seems to be a cry for help. They realize this is a real heavy lift and are looking for how to do it in a responsible way. It would be to their advantage to have this part of the ACA working, and not have this be a distraction. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 