A former Obama advisor: sometimes less health care is better health care
David Cutler: Nobody denies that there's a lot of waste. Estimates range from 15 to 20 percent on the low end to 50 percent at the high end. There are a few different categories of waste. One is clinical waste, things that are done that don't need to be done. A very classic example of that is  Another kind of waste is something we call "pricing failures." This is the idea that we pay much more for medical services than is necessary. In the Boston area, the cost of an abdominal CT scan ranges from $300 to $1,300. It's not that the hospital with the $1,300 scan is better — it's often the same machine, similar doctors — it's that the place with the more expensive service has more power in the market. The third kind of waste is administrative cost. What we spend on administrative expenses in the U.S. is twice what we spend on heart disease and three times what we spend on cancer. That's just absurd. Health care seems to be much less efficient than any other industry in getting rid of those administrative costs.  The fourth broad area is fraud and abuse. It's hard to know exactly how much, but it's a system where it's easy to imagine there is some fraudulent billing. Between all that, you get to enormous amounts of money. DC: Yes. Other countries deliver less care, because they have constraints on the total amount of technology available. For example, in all of Ontario there are 11 hospitals set up to do open-heart surgery; the government puts a limit on it. In Pennsylvania, which has roughly the same population and is much smaller geographically, there are 60 hospitals that can do open-heart surgery. That additional care doesn't seem to be doing much good. Survival after a heart attack is similar in the U.S. and Canada; most studies suggest that quality of life is similar, too. A lot of care seems to be provided in discretionary situations where it's not always necessary, nor is it doing very much. Other countries also don't pay the high prices that the U.S. does. And administrative costs are much lower in other countries. That's not to say that other countries are perfect. When I'm asked which country is best, I say, "Well, we have 25 examples of what not to emulate, and no examples of things to exactly emulate. DC: The whole title,   is about the fact that quality has to be front and center. If you ask people, "Do you want to save money in health care?" they'll say yes. If you ask, "Do you want to save money in health care by giving up valuable services?" they'll say no. And they're correct to say that!  That's just getting rid of the obvious, but  If you look at the poster children for bad care, like preventable readmissions, infections, and other hospital errors, there are very effective protocols that can be put in place. Hospitals have had enormous success with these. Well before we get into the question of "Do I know exactly which treatment should be done exactly when for exactly whom?" there's enough low-hanging fruit that we can make huge progress. DC: People yell at me about that a lot. I remember when I advised Senator Obama when he was running for president the first time; people kept asking, "What makes you think you'll be any more successful than the 25 people who came before you?" Part of the answer is that it helps to be optimistic. One of the things that's different between the failed Clinton health reform and what happened in the Obama administration is that, in the interim, the Institute of Medicine published volumes saying that  The argument on which many health reforms have faltered over time — that we're not sure what the right thing is because we're not sure how we compare to some optimal system — that argument got totally undercut. You can no longer argue that we can't do better. DC: All markets have two sides: they have the demand side and the supply side. The health care market is screwed up on both of them. So, on the demand side, we tell people to go out and be smart consumers of health care, only it's actually impossible to find out how much providers will charge you. Literally, if you call them, they can't tell you. We have to fix that. On the supply side, we have fee-for-service payment. We've told providers that we'll pay them more for doing more stuff — then we're surprised when they do more stuff! Fixing the supply-side problem is really about payment reform. As I see it, there's a substantial amount of agreement — including among people who don't like many features of the Affordable Care Act — that one of the worst features of health care is the way it goes about paying for things. Medicare has taken a halfway-step on payment reform with the   and   initiatives. Most hospital CEOs saying they expect to be on bundled payments in a few years. That's why hospitals are reducing their readmission rates; at present, a readmission is profitable, but hospitals suspect they won't be profitable in a few years. Right now we have one foot on the dock and one foot in the boat. The dock is the old fee-for-service system and the boat is a new, alternative payment system that is much more quality-based. It's untenable to try to do both. The dock wasn't working; we were  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 