Virginia is having an insane fight over Medicaid expansion
To back up: Virginia is among the 24 states that have not committed to participating in the  . Tens of thousands of Virginians would be eligible for Medicaid coverage under expansion although there are some discrepancies in estimates of how many: the Virginia governor's office estimates 4000,000 could benefit while Kaiser Family Foundation ballparks the number at  Virginia residents. Democratic Gov. Terry McAuliffe has been an ardent supporter of Medicaid expansion since he came into office this past January. He  for how the Medicaid expansion would work in the state, down to the technical upgrades that computers would need. This all happened as the Republican-controlled Virginia House was dead-set against expansion and   that didn't fund the program. The Senate, meanwhile,   that did fund the Medicaid expansion. That body is evenly split between 20 Republicans and 20 Democrats but in Democrat-control because the   who is the tiebreaker, is a Democrat. The whole fight is coming to a head right now because by the end of the month the Virginia government needs to pass a new budget. Because the House  budget doesn't fund the Medicaid expansion and the Senate budget does, negotiations are gridlocked. Either move would be a brazen challenge to the General Assembly, which under the state constitution has sole authority to appropriate money, including $2 billion a year in federal pass-through funds that would bankroll the Medicaid expansion. The latest twist in the story is arguably the craziest: Republicans appear to have persuaded a Democratic Senator to resign his seat in return for "awarding his daughter a state judgeship and himself a job as deputy director of the state tobacco commission" Vozzella   Sunday night. This would give Republicans at least temporary 20-19 control of the Virginia Senate, which may be all they need to pass a budget that  Medicaid expansion. And it gives the Democratic Senator a pretty nice state government job to boot. How exactly this ends isn't clear at this point. But it does point to the rest of the month being all out political war in Richmond over whether the state expands Medicaid. And it is arguably the most tense Obamacare fight happening anywhere in the country right now. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 