An interview with Healthcare.gov's new chief executive
.  Kevin Counihan: To be frank, I viewed it as a survival period. My goal was to get through open enrollment with as little customer disruption as possible and to make sure we earned the ability to start patching the system up in the summer of 2014. I thought that the time pressure was so tight that this was really just a time to make sure that you gained the credibly with your customers to earn the right to participate in the second year. I think there were about four things we were doing in the lead-up that worked for us. First it was the management team, it was getting the right kind of people. I hired the types of folks who wanted to prove something because you can't buy that type of commitment. Two was to create processes you could stick to and have the discipline to stick with our decisions. The third was vendor management. We all had these new vendors, nobody had enough to time to vet anyone as much as you would like, so how you manage the vendors was really important. The fourth is good software code, which isn't everything, but its important. Whenever we would make a decision, we would ask how does this impact consumers' ease and simplicity. If it added simplicity, it got accelerated. If it was something that didn't, it got cascaded down the list. remember KC: Actually it was just the opposite. I didn't feel like we were in the big leagues of the exchanges in the summer of 2010. It felt like we were minors, like Triple-A or something. During my second week,  I went down to meet with CCIIO [the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, the federal agency overseeing Obamacare] and they told me we were on the watch list of states that might not make. The Oregons and the Marylands, back then, seemed like these big sophisticated states that always had their act together. There's no heroes and villains in this thing. Everybody had their heart into this. I think some of us may have had more luck. Everybody tried, and some states are still trying. KC: The calls started coming at the end of 2013. We got, I think, five calls from various states between after Thanksgiving and before January 1. And that's really when this idea about creating the exchange solutions division came from. Like everybody, we need to have a financially sustainable exchange in a few years and this seems like one way to get there. We start hitting the conference circuit and I started putting together an informal marketing plan with different states we could talk to. KC: It's basically three things. One is an outsource model. there are some red states looking at this. This is a hypothetical, but if Wisconsin wanted to have a Badger exchange, we can build it and power the whole thing by AccessHealth CT. KC: Right now we have an assessment of 1.35 percent on all licensed health insurers in the individual and small group markets and all dental insurers [that will pay for the exchange]. Part of the point of having this revenue is reach a point where that assessment can be reduced. KC: There clearly are states that are either trying to repair what they have or are on the federally-facilitated marketplace [healthcare.gov] and are interested in moving out of it. Some of that can be ideological, like they don't like having the feds in their backyard, and there does seem to be some appetite for that. But there is another piece of this, which is federal grants and money, and it feels to me the temperature on that has changed. A year or so go there was a tremendous focus [from the Obama administration] in getting states to adopt their own exchanges. Now, it feels like that changed since they're more confident of healthcare.gov. I think the financing of this is getting trickier. KC: That is my understanding. But I have to say I don't know whether that reflects the current environment with Secretary Burwell coming in, and what direction she will take things in. KC: It's going to be very complex.  Not only are people going to be enrolling and going to be renewing, but there are going to have to be new determinations of what tax credits people qualify for. The education is going to be critical. My personal view is there's a little bit of an arc. T   Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 