7 reasons birth control pills shouldn't require aÂ prescription
Monday morning's   dealt a blow to contraceptive access. The ruling allows some for-profit corporations to provide insurance that doesn't cover birth control, essentially opting out of Obamacare's mandate. In the short-term, political efforts will surely focus on   created by the decision.  (Tim Boyle/Getty Images News) Since the birth control pill became mainstream, the main change has been a trend toward "low-dose" formulations; most pills contain lower levels of hormones than earlier versions.  Health risks are higher among certain women — those who are obese or who smoke, for example. Doctors and pharmacists believe that women are capable of self-screening for risk factors, and   to back them up. (BSIP/Universal Images Group) Obamacare requires that plans cover birth control pills without a co-payment. That's a solid strategy for improving access, but it may not be enough: multiple factors influence whether a woman has access to contraception, and affordability is only one of them. If a woman is unable to schedule a doctor's appointment - she can't get the time off of work, or find a babysitter, or she doesn't have access to a car or other transportation - that's a barrier to birth control, because a prescription is required to get the pill. Making insurance more generous can't fix that. One of the primary problems with oral contraceptives is the "drop-out" rate. Women receive birth control and start taking it, but the need to fill a prescription every month (or every several months) and to get the prescription renewed after a year leads to women abandoning the pill — and may have more unintended pregnancies as a result. Allowing women to buy birth control at the pharmacy without a prescription would broaden access. Drugstores typically keep longer hours than clinics and doctor offices, and they're often more conveniently located, too. (Karen Bleier/AFP) Doctors used to require a pelvic exam to check for cervical cancer or sexually transmitted infections before prescribing contraceptives. Though these screenings are still important, medical guidelines   these exams before a woman starts taking birth control. And in 2012, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists — an interest group representing women's physicians —   for making birth control available over the counter. Obstetricians and gynecologists aren't the only health care providers who support the move.  Bobby Jindal (Jason Sullivan/Getty Images News) Over-the-counter birth control isn't plagued by the same problem. Bobby Jindal, the Republican governor of Louisiana, wrote an editorial in favor of moving contraceptives over the counter in 2012, describing it as "common-sense" and a policy "that could yield a result everyone can embrace: the end of birth-control politics." Given the Supreme Court decision, we probably won't declare the end of "birth-control politics" anytime soon. But last week, Rep. Cory Gardner, a GOP Congressman running for Senate in Colorado, also  in support of making birth control accessible over the counter. "Fewer unneeded doctors' appointments mean fewer missed workdays and child-care expenses, more productivity and more time with family," Gardner writes. "With over 50,000 pharmacies in America and no appointment required, the increase in convenience and access would aid every adult woman who uses oral contraceptives, whether it's the first time they get them or when they run out and need a refill far from home." Among Republicans, over-the-counter birth control is seen as a palatable alternative to requiring employers and insurers to include contraceptives in their benefits — something that would stand in for the contraceptive mandate. But the existence of the contraceptive mandate doesn't change the merit of over-the-counter birth control policy. Source: K. Grindlay et al, Contraception 88 (2013) The nations where birth control is available over the counter tend to be low- and middle-income, but there's a trend toward expanding contraceptive access in high-income countries. In 2009, the British National Health Service launched an initiative in London to make birth control pills available at pharmacies without a prescription to women over 16. The project was successful, and NHS recommended scaling it up nationally. In Australia, pharmacists can dispense interim pills to women who need contraceptives but have expired prescriptions. And in  , a pilot program authorized pharmacists to provide birth control pills to women without a prescription from a physician. The effort was considered a success: both women and pharmacists thought it was a safe, effective, and acceptable. (Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images News) Lower prices would be good for women who want to buy contraceptives over the counter, good for women seeking contraceptives with a prescription, and good for the health care system as a whole. (Scott Olson/Getty Images News) Obamacare made contraception available without co-pays, but that doesn't necessarily eliminate the need for oral contraceptives on drug store aisles. Even when health reform is fully implemented, some people will still be uninsured — consider, for example, the low-income women in states not expanding Medicaid. For the uninsured, the need for a prescription presents an access barrier. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 