There's a bipartisan plan to fix part of Obamacare. Really.
On Thursday, four Senators — two Republicans and two Democrats — introduced legislation that would tweak an Obamacare program that is meant to improve patients' medical care, but, according to recent research, might actually be making things  for low-income patients. It's hard to know now whether this change will get any traction or,  , get trapped in the political process. Still, its a notable moment for the health care law, with Senators from both political parties making an apparently good faith effort to fix something in the law that doesn't seem to be working quite right. "We know that 16 to 20 percent of Medicare patients are likely to end up back in the hospital after 30 days," said Ashish Jha, a professor of health policy at Harvard who has done extensive research on the topic. "Why do some people come back and others don't? One of the other things we've known for some time is that poorer patients - people who live in communities with poorer health infrastructures and less social support — those people are more likely to end up back in the hospital." Medicare does have some ways of adjusting penalties to take into account the sickness (or health) of a hospitals' patients. But there are still things happening outside the hospital — a lack of primary care providers, for example, or difficulty following discharge instructions — that can send lower-income patients back for a second visit. On Thursday, Senators Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.), Roger Wicker (R-MS), Mark Kirk (R-IL) and Bill Nelson (D-FL) introduced the Hospital Readmission Accuracy and Accountability Act, which would require Medicare to account for socioeconomic status of patients when calculating penalties. Perhaps the most surprising thing here is the fact that a bipartisan crew of politicians came together to act: on Obamacare.  The new legislation itself won't make Obamacare any more expensive. It's been endorsed by the American Medical Association, the American Hospital Association, and a bevy of other provider groups. Medicare might need to refine the way they handle this over time, but Jha cautions against letting the perfect be the enemy of the good. "The models we have for socioeconomic status adjustment are better than having no model at all," he said. "We should do this — and continue working on new and better ways of doing it." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 