Why Dr. Oz can say anything and keep his medical license
So what about the state? A spokesperson at the department of health in New York, where Oz is licensed, pointed to the  . According to the New York code, doctors are prohibited from, "Advertising or soliciting for patronage that is not in the public interest... is false, fraudulent, deceptive, misleading, sensational, or flamboyant." On its face, that restriction would seem like the exact type of regulation that would shut Oz down. But it's not so easy: As Stephen Latham, a lawyer and director at the Yale Interdisciplinary Center for Bioethics explains, it's actually drafted to stop doctors from profiting from their own snake oil. "It prevents physicians from falsely advertising their own goods and services," he says, "not from making bogus claims about other people's goods and services, with no financial interest." Oz is not practicing medicine when he calls supplements "magic weight loss cures" or "lightening in a bottle" on TV. He also    any financial stake in the products he features on his show, so the state regulator has no grounds on which to go after him. Oz testifies before Congress (Tom Williams / CQ Roll Call "We do not regulate faculty speech," Columbia University Medical Center's chief communications officer, Doug Levy, said. Cracking down on the bogus claims Oz makes in public is outside of the university's purview. "There are faculty members at Columbia who disagree with him, and that's great. We think that's a healthy thing." , Associate Director of the division of advertising practices at the FTC, explained that it's a matter of free speech. A person's speech in America is protected by the  —unless it's  , which can be regulated by the government. "Talk show hosts, if they are not selling a product, if they don't have a financial stake in the product in any way, then their speech is fully protected," she says. , an international lawyer and visiting professor at the Harvard School of Public Health who has written about Oz's medical advice, thinks so. He said medical-regulatory systems need to change so that doctors like Oz are held to account. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 