The July effect is real: new doctors really do make hospitals more dangerous

 
   "The July effect" is shorthand for the supposed spike in medical mistakes at hospitals during the month of July — right when millions of medical residents start new jobs. With a crop of unexperienced doctors arriving in exam rooms, the theory goes, patients might get worse care — and might be more likely to die. In  The July effect is the kind of medical trivia that tends to turn up at cocktail parties, something I've always wondered about when it gets mentioned in passing as a definite fact. Is it medical lore or truth that July is a terrible month to be a hospital patient? At the same time, July isn't actually an especially deadly month to turn up at a hospital — even when you factor in all the new residents settling into hospital wards, the rate of patient deaths at hospitals (both at teaching and non-teaching hospitals) is actually higher in the winter than it is in the summer. As to the higher patient death rates in hospitals with doctors-in-training? It might not even be the newest doctors who are to blame. (The Boston Globe) Most studies exploit a helpful dichotomy in the American medical system. There are some hospitals that train new doctors, which are usually known as academic medical systems. But other hospitals aren't in the business of training physicians. Many studies compare outcomes in July in those two systems, to get a sense of whether the new crop of trainees makes a difference. In the more rigorous studies, they found that risk of death in July increased between 4 to 12 percent, depending on the research paper. One study of British hospitals — the one that preceded the idea of 'the killing season' there — found that patients seen on the Wednesday after the national crop of new doctors started were 6 percent more likely to die than those seen the Wednesday before. "Our review of the literature suggests that the 'July effect' exists," the team of researchers conclude, albeit with many caveats. "Methodological limitations and study heterogeneity do not permit firm conclusions about the degree of risk posed and how changeover affects morbidity and rates of medical error." In non-jargon speak: a July effect seems to exist, but the research isn't good enough to understand how big of an effect it has on patient health. (Christopher Furlong / Getty News Images) One of the studies that the  researchers thought was the very best, in terms of its rigor and analysis, was Dartmouth University Kane Anderson's  in the  It was one that did show a July effect among hip fracture patients: those seen during July in teaching hospitals had demonstrably worse outcomes than those seen in facilities not training new doctors. But here's the weird twist: in both teaching and non-teaching settings, Kane and his colleagues find that July tends to be a really good outcome month for patients. In fact, patients seen in either type of hospital during the summer had lower mortality rates than those seen in January. "Despite slightly higher mortality rates at teaching hospitals, July/August rates were generally the lowest rates across the months," Anderson and his colleagues write. So, somewhat counter-intuitively, his study suggests that July is a preferable month to be seen at a teaching hospital to January — even with the July effect taken into account. In other words: the best time of year to get medical care might actually be this very month at a non-teaching hospital. (Christopher Furlong / Getty Images News) "Advanced trainees, particularly fifth year trainees, are considered to be technically more competent," the authors write, but still need lots of supervision and "guidance about hospital routines, material, and organisation." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 