Each of these Hepatitis C pills cost $1,000. That's actually a great deal.
Economists argue that there's a tension in setting the price for a breakthrough drug like Sovaldi. We want to encourage more pharmaceutical companies to pursue similarly big developments — a cure for Alzheimer's, for example, or diabetes — but also want patients to have access to those treatments. When push comes to shove though, many prefer that we err on the side of higher prices as a way to encourage other big, blockbuster drugs in the future. French activists protest the price of Gilead's new Hepatitis C treatment (Sylvain Golden / AFP) Hepatitis C can be a a completely manageable condition for some patients – and debilitating for others. More Americans are now killed annually by the virus, which affects just over 3 million Americans, than AIDS. Hepatitis C is the leading cause of liver transplants in the United States as well. The idea of a Hepatitis C cure is a significant innovation over the treatments that exist now, which rely on interferon proteins. Those medical regimes only worked for about   and, even when successful, took longer and had worse side effects. "Pharmaceutical companies get criticized for lots of things like that," Craig Garthwaite, a health economist at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management, says. "This is an actual innovation, and that is something that they should get a reward for." One very expensive bottle of pills (MCT) The incentive for companies to create really blockbuster, breakthrough treatments would be smaller. Pharmaceutical companies are not, to nobody's surprise, benevolent non-profits. They're in the drug-making business to for the big paydays that come with a medication like Sovaldi. "It becomes a policy question, of what we're willing to trade for less innovation," he says. "We have to be very careful because the benefits to innovation are huge. And this is really the hardest question we have in health economics is this efficiency dilemma."  some "They're developing a product that's a cure that will essentially put their own treatments out of business," USC's Goldman says. "We'd love for pharmaceutical companies to come up with a treatment that cures diabetes rather than just treats it. I want to pay them enough so it's possible they'll start working on cures rather than treatments." Sovaldi could have decided to price its drug at $40,000, as advocates would like. It could have also, hypothetically, gone higher (one J.P. Morgan analyst estimated in 2013 that Gilead could sell Sovaldi for upwards of a half-million). Gilead doesn't release internal discussions on drug pricing, but its likely that the company decided $84,000 is what the market here would pay for its new treatment. At the end of the day, insurers and Medicaid agencies have the final trump card here. They could put their foot down, deny coverage for the drug and let massive protests from patients' ensue. But they haven't done that: while many publicly oppose the high price, they have also decided its something they need to offer patients. And, even though they don't like the high price for Sovaldi, at the end of the day, they're willing to pay for the value it provides. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 