The business model for antibiotics is broken. Here's how the White House could fix it
Today, the Obama administration made a long-awaited   about steps it would be taking to tackle drug resistance, following similarly urgent calls from other   earlier this year. The reason the world is taking action is simple:  antibiotic-resistant infections are a vexing problem, associated with  23,000 deaths and two million illnesses just in the US every year. Drug-resistant gonorrhea  is a reality everywhere  from Canada to South Africa; popular antibacterials for urinary tract  infections have been rendered useless in many parts of the world; and  some   a not too distant future in which we'll The  White House put the health-care costs of resistant infections  at $20-billion. The government's announcement involved an executive order by Obama to create a task force who will come up with a plan by February 2015 to combat drug resistance over the next five years.  He also called for more robust surveillance of antibiotic resistant diseases and new regulations to tackle the over-use of antibiotics in hospitals and on farms. The announcement also came with one immediate action item: the launch of a $20-million prize for the creation of a new rapid, point-of-care diagnostic test.  Taken together, this package signals a shift in thinking: while researchers have been shrieking  about this dire public-health scourge for decades, policymakers are  finally moving to tackle it. As Eric Lander, co-chairman of the  President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST), put  it: "This represents a major elevation of the issue-a major upgrading of  the administration's efforts to help address it." One of the scariest features of the crisis of antibiotic-resistance is that barely anybody is creating new drugs to address it. Unlike treatments for chronic diseases, people only use antibiotics for short periods of time. And we now know that we need to use them even more judiciously than we ever have, which is not exactly an appealing business proposition for large pharmaceutical companies. Infectious Diseases Society of America The number of antibiotics approved is dropping. CDC 2013 Along with today's announcement from the White House came a   from PCAST with recommendations about what needs to be done to address this crisis. One necessary focus area, the report read, is "increasing the longevity of current antibiotics by improving the appropriate use of existing antibiotics." In other words, one of the best ways to resolve the antibiotic problem is to wean the world off of the drugs. To do this, some people are already coming up with antibiotic alternatives. Kenney's Etoscope courtesy of EntraTympanic Two years ago, he began working with a team of doctors and  entrepreneurs from MIT, Harvard and Children's Hospital in Boston to  update a technique which physicians in Europe were using in the late  1700s. Back then, long before the first antibiotic was discovered,  doctors would prick a hole into a wee one's ear using a scalpel. The  reason? The tiny puncture would drain fluid that had built up to create  excruciating pain and pressure in the middle ear. The  ,  Kenney's device, automates that procedure. If it makes it through  clinical trials, it would allow physicians to do what their 18th-century  counterparts did, except with the technology to ensure doctor's have  enough depth perception to avoid harming the inner ear. At the hospital level, super-cleaning robots are another ripe area  for development. "Even after the best humans clean the room, they still  find C.difficile spores hiding on the ceilings or around the room," said The robots use   to kill off potentially harmful bacteria that cleaning staff may miss. Since   of US hospital patients acquire infections during their stays on the  ward every year, these automated super-cleaners could theoretically help  avoid some of those infections and the need for more drugs to treat  them, though their   remains to be seen. Another way to stave off unnecessary prescribing: better diagnosis.  Big prizes are being awarded around the world for anyone who can invent  better tools to diagnose disease at the point of care. The idea here is  that if we could do a better job of figuring out what illness is being  presented in the doctor's office, we'd prescribe fewer unnecessary  antibiotics. Today, the White House announced the launch of one such prize:  $20-million for whoever comes up with a new rapid, point-of-care  diagnostic test. This follows the announcement of the UK's   of £10 million to whoever comes up with a plan to address "one  of the greatest issues of our time." The prize panel in the UK is also looking for "cheap, accurate, rapid and easy-to-use point of care test  kit for bacterial infections." In a similar spirit, Médecins Sans Frontières launched the " ."  The winner here will be any inventor of a diagnostic tool that can tell  the difference between fever and sepsis. Sepsis, a bacterial infection  that can lead to death, requires antibiotics; a fever caused by a virus  would not. The tools that come out of these prizes might be able to tell  the difference. For years, the idea of "delinking" the pharmaceutical business model has been  around in academic and health circles, and it's only now gaining mainstream notoriety and political heft. Today's PCAST report suggested delinking is one of the key alternative  economic models for drug development. (The concept has also gotten MRSA, a staph bacteria that is resistant to certain antibiotics by Universal Images Group Røttingen "Delinkage removes the connection between funding and sales volumes," said  "You have a system where the patent-based incentive system is not working anymore," said Dr. Røttingen. "The innovator company wants a high-volume of sales. Society and public health needs a low volume of sales. That's why more and more, we're seeing an emerging consensus that you want to look into delinking." One way to generate money for drug development and deter over-use is to charge a usage fee for the drugs. "With sales of antibiotics in human health and agriculture estimated at $12 billion per year, a user fee of five percent, for example," the PCAST report reads, "would generate $600 million that could be devoted to incentivize the development of new antibiotics." Of course, the PCAST also called for a lot more than just user fees. Said Kevin Outterson, "They called for a dramatic increase in federal funding to prevent an antibiotic apocalypse, an additional $1.25 billion per year." This includes doubling federal spending on antibiotic resistance research, surveillance and spending. Pouring federal funding into antibiotic-resistance isn't an alternative business model of course, but, as Outterson said, "Given the costs and risks, this is money exceedingly well spent." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 