Obamacare is another step closer to the Supreme Court. Again.
This won't surprise anyone who's been following Obamacare's latest legal battle, but the case just got one step closer to the US Supreme Court. Again. The most recent legal challenge centers on the subsidies available to people newly insured on state insurance exchanges. The plaintiffs argue that, based on the plain text of the law, Congress only authorized subsidies for state-established exchanges and that subsidies shouldn't be available in the 36 states with federal exchanges. The federal government vehemently disagrees. The plaintiffs in It's not clear whether the high court will take up the case. Four justices have to agree to hear it, and they may wish to wait until   a related case, has fully played out. Unlike  , the government lost in  . There, the three-person panel of DC Circuit judges held that subsidies are illegal in the 36 states where the federal government runs health insurance exchanges. But the government plans to ask the entire DC Circuit — eleven judges in total — to review the decision "en banc". Because the full DC Circuit skews liberal, observers expect that the   decision will be reversed during en banc review. That probably won't happen until early fall. The  plaintiffs decided to skip an en banc petition. By skipping an en banc petition, the King plaintiffs hope to get the Supreme Court to hear their case this term. 
 
 The justices may wish to wait until Halbig's en banc review has been resolved before taking up one of the subsidy challenges. If they wait, that could push the timeline on a Supreme Court hearing back by a full year. Alternatively, the Supreme Court could decide not to hear any of these challenges. "We think that the Fourth Circuit's unanimous panel made the right decision, agreeing with Congress and common sense," said a senior White House official. "As we have previously said, the government is following the normal process and seeking a full review of 2-1 decision in the   case.  If the en banc DC Circuit rules in favor of the government, there will be no split in the courts of appeals and no need for Supreme Court review.  This litigation should be seen for what it is — another partisan attempt to undermine the Affordable Care Act." The petition to the Supreme Court can be read  . For our complete coverage of these lawsuits,  . Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 