The new Obamacare issue worrying consumer advocates
There's a tool for reducing health costs that many health economists and policy geeks are eager to embrace, but that leaves consumer advocates are somewhat wary. It's called reference pricing, and it's surprisingly controversial. In this cost-control scheme, insurers select a fixed price they consider "fair" for a given medical procedure, the " ." Their enrollees are encouraged to shop around to find a doctor; if they find someone who will offer the service at or below the reference price, the insurance covers it in full, or perhaps with a standard co-pay. But if the patient wants to visit a doctor who charges more than that reference price, she's responsible for paying the difference. By encouraging consumers to shop smartly for their care, health care providers are pressured to bring their prices in line with the reference price, or else risk losing customers. This is good for patients and, if scaled up widely and successfully enough, good for the health care system at large. This is very different from the current system, where insurers negotiate rates with certain hospitals and doctors, and patients face a (generally fixed) out-of-pocket cost for anyone that the insurer includes in their "network". If a patient wants to see someone out-of-network, they often have to foot much more of the bill — sometimes the whole thing — even if an out-of-network doctor is willing to charge comparable rates. "Reference pricing gives the individual more choice and uses the resources that insurers are willing to provide more efficiently, so economists love that,"  Reference pricing isn't widely-used yet; it requires a lot of investment in consumer education and support. But it has been deployed — with   — in the past, like with public employees in California. As more employers may be weighing the issue, the Obama administration has on the best way to proceed.  The group wants expenses beyond the reference price — the extra $2,000 spent at the knee surgeon — to count towards a patients out-of-pocket max. This would, Families USA argues, block insurers from using reference pricing as a scheme to get around the out-of-pocket limit. The group has also suggested that some services where there isn't much consumer choice — trips to the emergency room, for example, or highly specialized care — ought to be exempt. Instead, reference pricing ought to be limited to standard procedures like lab tests,  , and certain kinds of surgery. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 