7 ways to get vaccinated without a needle
Vaccines are utterly crucial for preventing a whole host of different diseases. Yet many people refuse to get them. Why is that? One possible reason is that some people are scared away by needles. So, in response, scientists have been developing needle-free vaccines — and they've made a few promising products so far.  ( )     ( ) Another needle-free option is the   flu vaccine, FluMist, which has been around for many years. The big difference here is that the nasal spray requires the use of a live flu virus (albeit a weakened version), unlike standard flu shots.     Teeny, tiny needle, compared to a penny. ( ) Most vaccines that people are familiar with use a needle to inject into the muscle. But vaccines such as   use a tiny microneedle (about   the length of a normal one and far thinner) that only injects as far as the skin. Because the skin has a lot of immune cells in it, this injection also requires less vaccine than the traditional kind.     ( ) Researchers at Georgia Tech and Emory University are working on   of microneedles, which get pressed onto the skin, where they release the vaccine. The team has shown that a metal patch  for flu vaccines in mice. And one version even uses polymer microneedles that   into the body. They're also looking into letting people administer the vaccine patch  . (The company   is working on a microneedle patch, too)     ( ) According to  , the company Aktiv-Dry has produced an inhalable measles vaccine that has been  to work in monkeys:     ( ) The same Wired story also mentions a project in the works by Aridis Pharmaceuticals, which it turns out involved a   with Johns Hopkins University researchers. It's a dissolving mouth strip designed for rotavirus vaccination in babies and isn't yet on the market. "Like the Listerine strip, theirs has a thin, quick-dissolving film," Gina Kolata described in a 2008 New York Times  , "But they also have a shell that protects the virus as it travels through the stomach’s acid to the small intestine." Standard-type needle is on the right. Newfangled mosquito-style needle is on the left. ( )   Sometimes you get a mosquito bite and don't even feel it. Researchers are trying to take that concept and apply it to vaccines. According to a   from Popular Science, researchers at Kansai University in Japan are working on a multipart   that includes vibrating jagged parts that likely make it so that the needles have to produce far less pressure to enter the skin (  here). This, they guess, will also lead to less pain. Thanks to Julia Greenberg and her   at Wired and Lana Birbrair and her  at Popular Science. Both helped me hunt down some of the more futuristic items on this list. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 