The one thing you need to know about weight loss and diet studies
Another day, another diet study,   demonstrating once again that all diets perform about the same.  Examining  the best-available studies about Atkins, Weight Watchers, and Zone diets,  researchers publishing in the journal   found that people tended to lose about five or seven pounds  over the course of a year, then re-gain some of that weight in the long term. They also found that — notwithstanding all the claims of superiority these programs make — a lot of the evidence on branded diets  was so low quality and short term, it  was hard to truly know which one worked best. "Despite  their popularity and important contributions to the  multi-million  dollar weight loss industry," said Mark J. Eisenberg, one of the  study's authors, in  a press release, "we still do not know if these  diets are  effective to help people lose weight and decrease their risk  factors  for heart disease." This latest bit of research follows a big     from September that also found that all diets — low   fat, low carb — have about the same modest results, no matter their macronutrient   compositions.   

Before you get dispirited by this news or bogged down in the latest finding — and I'm writing this up top because I don't want you to  miss it — if you take one thing away from this article about weight loss it's this: there is no magic diet, no belly blaster or   flab fighter, no weight loss wonder, or thinning superfood.  You can   ignore the noise, the hype, the branding, the celebrity-endorsed diet   books, and the Dr. Oz-backed   miracles in a bottle. You can even ignore the contradictory studies   that come out every few months. The one thing you need to know from science about dieting is rather   straightforward. What works is cutting calories in a way that you like   and can sustain. That's it. Fewer calories means more weight loss. It's really that   simple. You can stop reading here if you want. Studying diet is  , which is why many researchers — including the authors of the newest diet study — often conclude that the evidence out there is very low quality.  Consider this: if you stick people in a lab and carefully measure everything they eat,  you'll get an accurate picture of what went into their bodies, but the  results won't reflect what goes on in the real world. If you set  participants loose and ask them to report back on their calorie intake  with little monitoring, you'll still get an inaccurate view because  people are notoriously bad at remembering what they ate and frequently   their calorie consumption. Studying diet is also really expensive. So studies tend to be short  term, and again not reflective of real-world outcomes. And we know most  people, sadly, regain the weight they lose after a while, so in order to  understand whether a diet truly works, a study needs to run for more  than a year... and it's therefore more expensive and difficult to fund. The Mediterranean diet. (Photo courtesy of  ) Culture matters, too. This   of weight loss comparing low-carb, low-fat and Mediterranean diets  found that the low-fat group had less success than the others. The study  took place in Israel, Harvard's   told  .  "In Israel, people eat more of a Mediterranean-style diet to begin  with, so I think that people's customs — what they like to eat — had a  lot to do with the success of any particular diet advice." Carbs really aren't the enemy. (Photo courtesy of  .) Well, I told you already. But if you read this far, I'll reward you   with a few easy and evidence-based ways to cut calories: eat fewer   restaurant meals and stop drinking  .  We also know that people who track their calories and regularly   lose more weight than people who don't. , an Ottawa-based obesity doctor — who has worked with thousands of overweight and obese  patients —  says he tells people, "Ultimately you need to like the life  you're  living food-wise if you're going to keep living that way. It's  crazy to  think, with billions of people on the planet, that there's one   approach that suits everybody." He added: "The best diet for one   individual is the worst diet for another individual." In his book  the  , he reccommends tracking what you're eating for a few days to see where you're getting most of your calories and where you're tripping up, and then taking a hard and honest look at that information to figure out where you can reasonably cut back without hating your life. Tim Caulfield, author of the  ,   is also excellent on the question of  how to diet. He writes: "Be conscious of all  the  twisting forces that exist in our culture  (and within us) that are   constantly trying to pull us from a pattern of  healthy eating. These   forces include our own misconceptions about  ourselves and what we   eat... Refuse fast food. Don't get tricked into  accepting big portion   sizes.  "Don't let social pressures-friends, work  situations,   travel-derail healthy eating. And don't get bamboozled by  the ‘healthy'   or ‘organic' labels on packaged food. These are, by and  large,   marketing tools... Simplicity is the revelation." Julia Belluz on Dr. Oz's big weight-loss lies (and one truth). You're not alone. Even the diet gurus are fed up. Harvard's   said he's "dispirited about  all these crazes going back and forth"  with different diets coming in  and out of fashion every few years.   also said these  studies that focus on "the best diet" are mostly a  waste of time since  they're usually so low quality, they don't tell us  much anyway. "It's the wrong question," he added. "The better question now should   be 'what is the best diet for different individuals, and how can we   match them to those diets?'" To understand this, Gardner said   researchers would need to look at people's behaviors, microbiomes and genetic   makeup, and how they respond to particular diets. Until science reveals   this more refined picture, remember Caulfield: simplicity is the   revelation. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 