7 charts that explain America's obesityÂ problem
A quick glance at   from the Centers for Disease Control tell a pretty damning tale of obesity in the US. (Map courtesy of the  .) In every state, at least one-fifth of American adults are obese. In  the Southern and Midwestern parts of the country, the problem is even more acute, and  Mississippi and West Virginia have the   obesity rates at over 35 percent. Only a seven states and one district — Massachusetts, Hawaii, Colorado,  Vermont, Montana, Utah, California, and the District of Columbia —  recorded obesity rates below a quarter. Colorado was the least  obese state, with a prevalence of 21.3 percent, followed by Hawaii at  21.8 percent.   
 (Chart courtesy of the  .) Even more damning than the overall trend toward obesity are the  racial disparities in the rates. Black people reported the highest  obesity prevalence (37.6 percent) followed by Hispanic people (30.6  percent) and then white people (26.6 percent). So there was a more than  10 percentage point difference between obesity in blacks and whites. This map shows the obesity prevalence by state among whites for the years 2011 to 2013.   
 (Map courtesy of the  .) By contrast, you can see the obesity rates among black adults for the same years. You'll notice that there are many more states reporting the highest obesity rates for this population.   
 (Map courtesy of the  .) The last map shows obesity among Hispanic people. Again, there's more obesity in this population than there is among white people but fewer Hispanic folks are obese when compared with black people.   
 (Map courtesy of the  .) The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation's   report found that there is a strong correlation between obesity, and  education and income levels. "Over 35 percent of adults age 26 and older  who did not graduate high school were obese, compared with 22.1 percent  of those who graduated from college or technical college," they  reported. "Thirty-three percent of adults who earn less than $15,000 per  year were obese, compared with 25.4 percent of those who earned at  least $50,000 per year." (Map courtesy of the  .) So as you have probably surmised by now, the scourge of obesity is very real across America and in all racial and socio-economic groups.     (Chart courtesy of the  .) But hidden among the alarming trends was a shred of good news: there is  increasing evidence that obesity rates are beginning to plateau. As the   report showed, over the past 35 years obesity rates in adults more than  doubled but — between 2009 and 2012 — they stayed the same. In  children, rates have more than tripled since 1980 but also plateaued for  the last decade. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 