How to rearrange your environment to lose weight
The design of a food label, the size of a package, the name of a restaurant item: for more than two decades, Cornell professor Brian Wansink has been studying how these little things add up to shape the decisions we make about our food — and reshape our bodies. You may remember Wansink from such classic research as "the  " study, which showed that people will mindlessly guzzle down soup as long as their bowls are automatically refilled, or the " " study, which demonstrated that we'll gobble up stale and unpalatable food when it's presented to us in huge quantities. Brian Wansink. (Photo: Jason Koski.) Over the years, Wansink has become increasingly convinced that, perhaps more than anything, we need to redesign our environments to nudge people toward healthy eating. "It's easier to become slim by design  than slim by will power," he told Vox. "Design you change once; will power you have  to do every day for the rest your life." With a new book out,  , Vox spoke to him about the small changes he thinks people should make to live healthier lives and how consumers can be empowered to alter their surroundings — from restaurants to grocery stores and schools — in a way that could help us all lose weight. Brian Wansink: I have been researching in this area of how you can influence healthy eating for 25 years. We had been doing research on packaging, and found that smaller packages mean people end up eating dramatically less food. I found people would pay a premium for smaller packages. I told M&M, Mars and Nabisco to make 100-calorie packs. They didn't believe it at first, but they eventually made them, and that ended up being a huge success. Since then, I've been looking at what are the things in our environments that trip us up. With  , I'm looking more broadly across society: what we can do ourselves, in our homes, our restaurants, where we shop, to be healthier. BW: For example, we have this  100-point scorecard  for lunch rooms in schools. Instead of banning  chocolate milk, it gives schools points if they make white milk more  convenient and attractive to  drink. If there is fruit that's  provided  within two feet of a cash register, they'd get another point. If they  name the healthy vegetables cool names, another point. Most school  lunchrooms  initially only score between 20 to 30 points. These changes  can be  made in a weekend and cost almost nothing to do.   BW:  Up until now, consumers haven't really known that they could ask a   restaurant to change, or ask their workplace or school to make changes.  They didn't know what to ask. That's been my mission for the last seven  years: trying to figure out what can be done that works. If we get a  restaurant to offer half-size portions, it's not just us  who benefit,  it's all the people who didn't realize to ask for half-size  portions.  Then a sea change happens. To cause a transformation, we can't do it by  shaking a finger at restaurants or grocery stores. You have to do it by   hitting it where it counts the most: having consumers say "here's what I   want." BW: The reason I'm not very sanguine  about policy is that it tremendously backfires. I can guess in 1920 that  they thought Prohibition was going to be a great  idea. There's a lot  of things I don't think it would be a good idea to  ask restaurants to  do, that won't make them more money,  but there are a lot of things they can do that would help us eat better  and they'd make more money: offering half-size portions, not offering  bread baskets.  What we've tried to do in the past is to fight the  obesity crisis by  asking the individual to do it: saying it's will  power and education.  We  tried to become slim by willpower and then  slim by policy, and that  didn't  work well. What we haven't done is  engage the consumer. BW: People need to make sure they have a fruit bowl within two feet of where they regularly  walk in their kitchen. The second change I'd make is don't eat lunch at your  desk. Go out to lunch. Get away from the desk. You'll not only feel happier but you'll be  less likely to overeat snacks and you're going to enjoy things more. The third thing I'd do would be to   and print out the scorecard  for your child's school and give it to the food services director and  principal to work on. BW: It's a good question. To understand that, we're going to have a   registry. We want to know what healthy  weight people, who have never had a weight fluctuation, know that the rest of us don't know. If we knew what they  did differently we would have some idea of how we might want to change. So  this registry invites people to come there and if they can qualify, we  ask them about 100 different questions: describe your typical breakfast, what  do you do when you're hungry in the afternoon. We ask them questions  and the goal is to come up with a series of answers about what slim people  do that makes them thin or able to avoid food and not have these food  cravings most of us have. BW: If only 20 percent of us are getting  empowered, those people are going to benefit natively. All of a sudden,  fast food restaurants put healthy stuff at the top of menu boards, or have  little table tins that advertise water or milk instead of soda. It's all the people who didn't even know they had a problem that will benefit by being in an  environment that we've changed. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 