Why Obama is committing 3,000 troops to fight Ebola
As the worst-ever Ebola epidemic rages on in Africa, President Barack Obama announced Tuesday that the US will ramp up efforts to combat the the virus as part of "the largest international response in the history of the CDC." In an   from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention headquarters in Atlanta, Obama said that the US is willing to take the lead on international efforts to combat the virus. Ebola "is a global threat, and it demands a truly global response,"  . "This is an epidemic that is not just a threat to regional security.  It's a potential threat to global security, if these countries break  down, if their economies break down, if people panic," he said. "That has profound  effects on all of us, even if we are not directly contracting the  disease." This outbreak is already "spiraling out of control," he added. The speech came amid increasing criticism that the international community has not responded quickly and boldly enough to what has become the worst Ebola outbreak in history. And Obama's words at the CDC were more alarming and urgent than his   on Ebola in August, when he emphasized that the disease is one that strikes under-funded health systems. So far, more than 2,400 people have died this year from Ebola — more than the combined total  of all previous outbreaks since the first recorded in  1976 — and the epidemic has spread to five African nations, including Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Nigeria, and Senegal. Experts at a senate hearing on Tuesday said that the actual death toll is much higher, and that without effective actions to stop it, the case load will grow into the hundreds of thousands. More cases, they cautioned, will mean more potential for Ebola spread  beyond Africa. "The reality is this epidemic is going to get worse before it gets better, but right now," Obama said, "the world still has an opportunity to save countless lives. Right now the world has a responsibility to act, to step up, to do more." To turn the outbreak around, the The US USAID will also support a program of distributing kits with sanitizers and medical supplies to some  400,000 of the most vulnerable households in Liberia. The Obama administration has asked Congress for an additional  $88  million to combat Ebola,  including $30 million to send more relief   workers and lab supplies from  the CDC and $58 million to invest in  the  development of the  experimental Ebola drug ZMapp and two vaccine   candidates. Despite the alarm about the situation in Africa, the White House continues to quell worries about Ebola in America. President Obama said the chances of Ebola spreading in the US are "extremely low." "US health professionals agree it is highly unlikely that we would experience an Ebola outbreak here in the United States, given our robust health care infrastructure and rapid response capabilities," reads a   from the administration.  "Nevertheless, we have taken extra measures to prevent the unintentional importation of cases into the United States, and if a patient does make it here, our national health system has the capacity and expertise to quickly detect and contain this disease." At a Tuesday   on Ebola in West Africa, health officials who have been working on the front line of this epidemic said that if the world doesn't act now, it's only a matter of time before cases start turning up on shores outside of Africa. Beth Bell, director of the National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases at the CDC, said that the number of Ebola cases could balloon into the "hundreds of thousands" without effective interventions. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said  budget cuts at his agency can be partly to blame for the slow response to the outbreak. The lack of funding "eroded, in insidious ways, our ability to respond in the way I  and my colleagues would like to respond to these threats." He also said it's very unlikely that the virus will mutate to become airborne, though he couldn't rule it out given biology's unpredictability. The American Ebola survivor Kent Brantly, who contracted the virus while working as a medical missionary in Liberia, criticized the "painfully slow and ineffective" response to the outbreak, and noted that the international community only seemed to wake up to Ebola in July, after he and his colleague Nancy Writebol got infected. "Many have used the analogy of a fire burning out of control to describe  this unprecedented Ebola outbreak. Indeed it is a fire-a fire straight  from the pit of hell," he said, with his wife seated next to him. "We cannot fool ourselves into thinking that the  vast moat of the Atlantic Ocean will keep the flames away from our  shores." He called on more investment in Ebola "to keep entire  nations from being reduced to ashes." Dr. Bell painted a picture of a best and worst case scenario for this outbreak. "The best case scenario is that over the coming months we're able to effectively isolate and treat Ebola patients, we're able to effectively trace all their contacts to make sure they're all followed for 21 days, we're able to do something about safe burial practices so we don't have bodies in the streets." Eventually, she said, we'll see the caseload decrease. "In the worst case scenario, we continue to see an exponential rise in cases that we're currently seeing. And an important corollary to that is exportation to other countries." She noted that the outbreak that originated in Guinea in December has already spread to Liberia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Senegal. "You can imagine the outbreak spreading outside the borders as part of a worst-case scenario."   Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 