Doctors and hospitals got at least $3.5 billion from industry in just five months
By now, it's no surprise that medicine operates under  the influence  of industry. For decades, physicians and pharmaceutical  companies have  enjoyed cozy relationships. Though these links have led  to the  discovery of life-saving drugs and devices, they have also bred  harmful  conflicts of interest.   revealed that doctors' relationships with industry can alter their   prescribing practices and decision-making for the worse, and   pharmaceutical companies have paid out billions of dollars in fines for  fraudulent marketing practices. These relationships have  been mostly cloaked in secrecy and hidden from view — until today. This afternoon a government-run   went live, detailing 4.4 million payments to more than 546,000 doctors and 1,360  teaching hospitals. In total, they show that industry paid doctors and  hospitals at least $3.5 billion in only the last five months of 2013. Here's what you need to know: The   is part of the Affordable Care Act, passed by Congress in 2010. It   mandates that every pharmaceutical and medical device company in the   country annually disclose payments made to doctors and teaching   hospitals for a range of activities — including promotional speaking,   research grants, meals, and trips of at least $10 value. In addition,  manufacturers and group  purchasing organizations are required to report  physician ownership or  investment interests.     The companies had to  provide details to  the federal agency, the Centers for Medicare  and Medicaid Services  (CMS), about what they gave to whom and why, the  amount and date of the  payment, the name and address of the recipient,  the associated physician  ID number, the form of the payment (cash,  services, stock options,  etc.), and a few words about the context under  which the payment was  made.  Payments about medical  doctors, osteopaths, chiropractors, podiatrists, dentists, and  optometrists are   but not nurse practitioners and physician  assistants  since the law doesn't require reporting on payments to these groups. CMS made this information public in  an   that launched on September 30. The idea behind the database is simple: by shedding light on payments   to  medical professionals, the public can be informed about potential    conflicts of interest. The sunshine is also meant to deter potentially    harmful doctor-industry relations. This type of remedy has been a long-time coming. Research for  has shown that   — from industry-sponsored   to   with pharmaceutical-company sales representatives, and even drug   provided by those companies — can bias a doctor's judgment in all sorts    of ways. It can color  the medical education they give to future    doctors, cause them to inappropriately  prescribe drugs, to push of medicine, or for drugs to be included on their hospital formularies. Industry-funded studies are also four times  to lead to favorable and positive results than independent research. The side-effects of this " " behavior range from waste in the health system, to mistreatment of patients, and even  .   Sometimes the drugs aren't all right. (Photo by   Research has also shown that relationships between the medical profession and industry are  ,   according to the New England Journal of Medicine: a 2007 study showed   that 94 percent of American physicians had some kind of tie with   industry.   Of those, 83 percent took gifts, and nearly 30 percent received   payments for  professional services such as consulting or research   participation.  "By 2001," the article authors wrote, "industry   had become the major source of research and  development funding,   accounting for 55 to 60 percent of some $100 billion  annually."  Of   the doctors receiving this money, more than half were involved in   educating future doctors, and 40 percent wrote medical practice   guidelines. That means the very doctors who are supposed to be providing   independent advice to the next generation of doctors or to committees   who write guidelines that will steer their practice have interests that   lie in places other than public health.   (Chart from Archives of Internal Medicine via  ) The new CMS database will only include payments made to doctors  between  August 1, 2013 and December 31, 2013, so it is by no means a  complete  picture of payments health professionals received. And while $3.5 billion  in payments sounds like a lot, it's estimated that companies spend about  on marketing, so again, this is only a snapshot of what's  actually going on between doctors and industry.  What's more, CMS  says 40 percent of the 4.4 million records they collected are  "de-identified" for now. This means that nearly half of the data on the database  will not contain the name of the physician or teaching hospital that  received a payment but only the name of the manufacturer because of  unresolved concerns about the accuracy of the data. They promise this data  will be fully identifiable by June 2015. About  199,000 records that were collected won't be published at all today. Of  these, CMS says 190,000 are being withheld because they met the criteria  for a delay in publication since they involved a new product or one that's under  regulatory review by the Food and Drug Administration. The remaining  9,000 were not published because of ongoing disputes with industry about  the accuracy of the data. So this means that some payments to  doctors and hospitals just won't show up, and the fact that you don't  find a doctor or hospital listed doesn't mean they haven't been paid. The American Medical Association, along with dozens of health professional groups and medical societies, had   the federal government to delay the launch of the database for six months. They wanted   more time to review the data.  CMS didn't comply, which has been a   sticking point for   doctors, who also   against the Act along with industry. AMA  president Dr. Robert Wah tells Vox, "We are   concerned that with this  data release, patients may take the information   out of context or more  importantly that there will be inaccuracies   within the data."  He   says CMS provided doctors with too little time to correct the data    (45 days) and that the website's user interface made it difficult   to  correct mistakes. Of the more than half a million doctors on the database, CMS says only about 26,000 registered on their Open Payments website to review their and 400 hospitals did so. Dr. Aaron Carroll, assistant dean for   research mentoring at Indiana University School of Medicine, was one of the few who got online to check his data, and he had one of   those less-than-ideal experiences. When he logged into the CMS site, he found a pharma-sponsored lunch was ascribed to  him  that he actually didn't participate in. It then took him hours to   dispute and correct the claim. "The website had so many bugs in it. Half   the time I would click things, and no matter what I did, I was brought   to an error screen. It was just a horrible," he says. While the   mistake was so minimal — a $15 meal — that even if it wasn't caught,  it  wouldn't harm his career, he worried about the reputations of his   colleagues who might have bigger errors attributed to them that they   only learn about with the launch of the site. "I don't know how easy it   will be to correct or fight this stuff." For now, users of the   database must proceed with caution, keeping in mind data may be   incorrect or that it may be misleading or unrepresentative. Journals now require physicians to disclose their conflicts of    interest, and so do some hospitals. Several states — such as Maine,    Massachusetts, Minnesota, and Vermont —  mandate the public reporting of    financial relationships, too.  Legal settlements with the   Office  of Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human    Services  have also forced more than a dozen  pharmaceutical companies   to report  their relations with physicians  under "corporate integrity   agreements,"  and several pharma companies and medical device   manufacturers  voluntarily report payments to doctors on their own   websites.  Notably,  ProPublica, the  investigative news website, has  been tracking   publicly   reported payments to doctors since 2010 on its  easily  searchable  .   So  this data about conflicts of interest exists  elsewhere. But what's    supposed to be different about the newly-launched database is that   it  is designed to  be a central location for payment data building    annually from 2013. There's also the possibility that CMS can audit   reports and fine stakeholders for lying, which means it should   theoretically be more accurate than other company-run databases. Time will tell whether this turns out to be the comprehensive and   user-friendly resource it is supposed to be, and CMS emphasizes that it's a work in progress.. But right now, many   observers are skeptical.  Dr.  ,    associate professor of surgery at Johns Hopkins, pointed out that   while  there is already public disclosure of industry ties in many   places,  doctors still don't have to report their conflicts to patients   during  their everyday interactions. He wondered why this hasn't   happened yet and whether patients will have the  wherewithal to check   databases for this information.  "Is the patient  going to know   that this information is out there, and know  where to go  find it?" he   asks. "Those are real barriers to the world of patient-centered  care." There's also the question of whether and how this database will actually change behavior. Dr.  ,    an associate professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, says,  "I   don't know that there's any good evidence yet on how these data are    going to effect patients or physicians."  For example, one   used the state sunshine laws already implemented in Maine and West   Virginia  to see what effect they had on doctors'  prescribing of   cholesterol-lowering statins and selective  serotonin reuptake    inhibitors for some mood disorders. These classes of drugs have good    generic alternatives but pharmaceutical companies heavily marketed the    branded versions to doctors. The researchers found physicians continued   to  prescribe branded medications, and that the state laws had little    impact on prescribing practices. "[Sunshine]   is a long time coming, it's a welcome evolution,"  Kesselheim says.   "But there's a lot of work left to be done. It's going  to be important   to use the data and figure out how to use the data in  the right way to   try to better educate physicians and patient." Trudo Lemmens, a   University of Toronto-based expert on pharmaceutical regulation,  worries  that mandatory disclosures could become "a  cleansing ritual"  for  doctors with little actual impact on the profession or patients.  "You  get rid of your sins by  confessing, then the problems with  conflict of  interest are washed  away," he says.  "We've seen  studies  suggesting that when disclosure is introduced  as a method by  physicians  telling their patients — 'I'm being paid by  company x' — in  a strange  way it sometimes leads patients to have greater  trust in  the  specialists."  Lemmens hopes people are aware of these   and that disclosure doesn't just replace more effective means of actually disinfecting industry-physician relationships.  Unintended   consequences also include the potential that transparency could have   the opposite of the desired effect among some highly-paid,   entrepreneurial specialties — such as surgeons who work closely with   medical device companies, says the director of Columbia University's   Center for the Study of Society and Medicine      David Rothman.   "These   are the entrepreneurs," Rothman says. "They may take publication of   income, their money, as a point of pride. It's possible sunshine will   breed a kind of horse race and doctors will turn to a company and say   'hey all my colleagues are getting x, I'm only getting y. I want more.'" As the AMA said in a statement, "Just because a  physician has a   relationship with industry does not automatically mean  that his or  her   professional judgment has been influenced inappropriately."  Dr. Thomas Stossel, known as Harvard's " ,"   says doctors' work with industry is "necessary and beneficial." He   worries that the Sunshine Act could make it embarrassing and difficult   for doctors to do work like developing medical devices or designing   clinical trials, and that industry may start avoiding working with   American doctors because of the time and investment disclosure will   require.   "Some smaller companies may think this is too much   trouble," he says. "They'll say 'we're not going to contract with   American medical schools, we'll just do it in Croatia." There are other limits to the Sunshine Act. Namely, conflicts of   interest are a moving target. Payments to  health professionals for   marketing have been plummeting in recent years. It's possible that since   this law was conceptualized and enacted, the target has already  shifted  and companies may now be required to disclose their  least-troubling  marketing practices.  According to ProPublica,  "Eli Lilly and Co.'s payments to speakers   dropped by 55 percent, from  $47.9 million in 2011 to $21.6 million in   2012." During that time, Pfizer's payments decreased by  62 percent,   from about $22 million to $8.3  million. Companies including   GlaxoSmithKline have already reported that they'll be moving away from   paying doctors to market their drugs soon, and instead train their own   in-house physicians to do the job.  Kesselheim has run some of   these analyses and also found payments to physicians are shrinking over   time. "In the back of your mind, there's a concern that if you   shed   some light on one aspect of pharma marketing, that there will  be  ways,   people will try to skirt or game the system to try to avoid the     sunshine."  So if payments to doctors have been declining in    recent years, the question now is where the money is being  spent and   what changes will need to be made to the Sunshine Act to reflect them . No matter what happens today, it's important to note that this move   is part of a new era of transparency in doctor-industry relations,   however imperfect. Even the skeptics think this is a solid, if   incomplete and overdue, step in the right direction. Sen. Chuck Grassley, one of the authors of the Sunshine Law. (Photo by Bill Clark/CQ-Roll Call Group) In   recent years, companies have been putting more and more   information  that  was previously hidden from view into the  pubic   domain.  This has  included everything from payments to physicians  to previously  .   There's already anecdotal evidence that suggests that many physicians —   knowing the Sunshine Act was coming into effect — have stopped   accepting gifts from industry. But the question remains whether and how   people will access this data to improve the practice of medicine. In    a statement, Senator Charles Grassley — who co-wrote the law — says  he  is hopeful. "Transparency shouldn't stop doctors from receiving a    payment if they want to. It should empower consumers to learn whether    their doctors take payments and if so, why, and whether that matters to    them." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 