Stop reading this story and go get a flu shot
Here's a more productive way to stay healthy this fall than worrying abut the incredibly unlikely event of an American   outbreak: Get a flu shot. It's cheap, its inexpensive, and it will help safeguard you against a disease that kills thousands of people each year. The Centers for Disease Control  that all Americans older than 6 months get   annually. Unless you are a particularly precocious 5-month-old, this includes you. To protect yourself and those around you. Let's say you're a selfish person (we're not judging). The best reason to get a flu shot is to protect yourself against the upcoming flu season. The flu can be deadly; in 2004, an especially vicious outbreak killed more than   in the US. Not every flu season is this bad. Others have killed as few as 3,000 people. But it's really hard to predict in advance how bad each flu season will be and a flu shot is a relatively cheap and easy way to hedge your bet against a bad season. If you care any bit about those around you, there's an even more compelling case for vaccination.  If a small number of people are vaccinated, that's a bit of a roadblock for the disease — but likely not an insurmountable one. There are still lots of unprotected people susceptible to the sickness. And the handful of people who are immunized aren't entirely safe, either. Vaccines do significantly reduce the risk of getting sick, but they aren't bulletproof. The flu vaccine, for example, was estimated to have a 61 percent success rate this year at blocking disease. If vaccines are going to work, they rely heavily "on the decreased likelihood that anyone will come into contact with the disease," Carroll says. When you get vaccinated, it makes it harder for other people you come into contact with to catch the flu. This is important if you ever interact with the elderly, whose weaker immune systems aren't as able to fight off the infection. In other words: if you love your grandparents, get a flu shot. That's a trick question: you should! But 58 percent of American adults don't, according to  . Flu is a disease with some of the lowest vaccination rates. While lots of other vaccinations are required for kids to go to school, the flu has no similar nudge. One   found they have a lot of excuses. About three in ten Americans say they don't need a flu shot. Another 16 percent just don't get around to it.   
 Let's go through a few of the excuses. : The CDC thinks otherwise, and recommends the flu vaccine for all adults. Whether or not you caught the flu last year says nothing about your susceptibility this season. And, as mentioned earlier, the flu vaccine isn't just about you: more vaccinated people means more protection for everyone around you. : Yes, we're all busy. But flu shots are one of the easiest medical treatments to obtain. Walgreen's, CVS, and other major pharmacy chains offer flu shots. In New York City, you can even   a flu vaccine straight to your home or office for $25. Good news! There's a nasal flu vaccine. And the CDC the nasal vaccine is just as good as the version that involves a needle. Most drugstores or doctor offices can administer flu shots. To find a location near you, use HealthMap's  Most health insurance covers the complete cost of a flu shot but, for the uninsured, HealthMap provides price data too (Costco, which charges   for a flu shot, seems to have the cheapest price but CVS does offer a 20-percent-off-the-entire-store coupon upon vaccination, if you really want to live large). So find a location, and get vaccinated. There is no good reason not to. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 