How many people have insurance because of Obamacare?
Trying to count the number of people who have signed up for Obamacare? Good luck. We won't know the exact number of newly insured for a while. But the latest estimates, with a few precautions, can provide a glimpse into how far Obamacare went in accomplishing its main goal: to cover as many of the uninsured as possible. The president announced marketplace enrollment numbers on April 1. Pete Marovich / Getty Images Sport  The White House's   covers how many people signed up for Obamacare's marketplaces, which you probably know as  . This includes people who have paid their first month's premium and those who haven't. It also includes some people who were previously insured, as well as those buying coverage for the first time. The White House has not published a breakdown of how many of these people have paid or how many are newly insured. 1) Medicaid enrollees, including those who gained coverage through Obamacare's  . 2) Many young adults who, due to Obamacare, can now stay on their parents' health plans until they turn 26. Many in this group were insured before open enrollment began on October 2013, since the health-care law allowed them to enroll on their parents' plans starting in 2010.  Some people who signed up for insurance through Obamacare won't pay their premiums and so, in the end, won't get insurance.  HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius helped promote Obamacare. Paul Morigi / Getty Images Entertainment  The White House's   covers every new Medicaid enrollee from October through February. Not all of these people signed up because of Obamacare:  The report does break up the numbers between expansion and non-expansion states. Expansion states added more than 2.6 million new enrollees from October through February. Non-expansion states, meanwhile, only added 380,000 new enrollees. 1) People signing up for private insurance coverage through   and state-based exchanges. 2) Anyone who signed up for Medicaid in March, when the White House reported a surge of signups as people rushed to avoid  . 2) The estimate comes with a lot of smaller caveats, mostly to reflect the different reporting methods states use. Some states, for example, only report Medicaid-enrolled households, which can reflect a whole family of enrollees, while other states report individuals. CBO Director Doug Elmendorf prepares to talk to Congress. Tom Williams / CQ-Roll Call Group  The Congressional Budget Office (CBO)   project everyone who gained and lost insurance through fiscal 2014. The CBO estimates 6 million people gained insurance through the exchanges and an additional 7 million got coverage through Medicaid, while up to 500,000 lost their employer-based plans and another 1 million lost other forms of coverage. That works out to a net gain of 12 million newly insured, according to the CBO. 1) Many young adults who, due to Obamacare, can now stay on their   parents' health plans until they turn 26. Many in this group were   insured before fiscal 2014, since the   health-care law allowed them to enroll on their parents' plans  starting   in 2010. 2)   enrollees who gained coverage before fiscal 2014, because their   states expanded Medicaid before Obamacare's expansion funding kicked in.  CBO numbers are susceptible to revisions. In February, CBO   13 million would gain insurance through Obamacare. This revision subtracts 1 million from that projection. The Los Angeles Times building. David McNew / Getty Images News The Los Angeles Times'   tries to include everyone who is newly insured under the health-care law. This includes marketplace signups, Medicaid enrollees, and under-26 young adults who stayed on their parents' plans. 1) Many young adults who, due to Obamacare, can now stay on their  parents' health plans until they turn 26. Many in this group were  insured before open enrollment began on October  2013, since the  health-care law allowed them to enroll on their parents' plans  starting  in 2010. 2)   enrollees who gained coverage before open enrollment, because their  states expanded Medicaid before Obamacare's expansion funding kicked in. 3) Anyone who signed up during the last couple weeks of March, when the White House reported a surge of signups as people rushed to avoid the penalty from  . 1) The number is a rough estimate based on a collection of sources, including surveys and preliminary White House data. 2) The Medicaid numbers don't differentiate between enrollees who gained eligibility under   and enrollees who qualified even without the expansion. Americans sign up for health insurance at an Obamacare enrollment fair. Justin Sullivan / Getty Images News  The Urban Institute's Health Reform Monitoring Survey   how many adults gained coverage between September 2013 and early March. It includes marketplace and Medicaid enrollees who, prior to September, did not have coverage. 1) Many young adults who, due to Obamacare, can now stay on their parents' health plans until they turn 26. Many in this group were insured before open enrollment began on October  2013, since the health-care law allowed them to enroll on their parents' plans  starting in 2010. 2)   enrollees who gained coverage before open enrollment, because their states expanded Medicaid before Obamacare's expansion funding kicked in. 3) Anyone who signed up during the last couple weeks of March, when the White House reported a surge of signups as people rushed to avoid  . 4)  RAND's survey found mixed results for the president's health-care law. Alex Wong / Getty Images News In total, the survey   14.5 million gained coverage and 5.2 million lost coverage in the six-month period. That works out to the net gain of 9.3 million newly insured. RAND suggested  1) Many young adults who, due to Obamacare, can now stay on their  parents' health plans until they turn 26. Many in this group were  insured before open enrollment began on October  2013, since the  health-care law allowed them to enroll on their parents' plans  starting  in 2010. 2)   enrollees who gained coverage before open enrollment, because their  states expanded Medicaid before Obamacare's expansion funding kicked in. 3) Most people who signed up during the last couple weeks of March, when  the White House reported a surge of signups as people rushed to avoid  . 4)  A woman is walked through the enrollment process. Joe Raedle / Getty Images News 2)  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 