One in three Americans didn't see the dentist last year
 of exchange enrollees opted not to purchase a stand-alone dental plan, which covers the teeth cleanings and other oral health services not typically included in major medical insurance. This means that lots of people gaining insurance through the health care law might not have better access to dentists. And that's actually a pretty significant public health problem. Health and Human Services estimated that   people with employer-sponsored coverage have dental insurance as well. That leaves about 180 million people who don't have oral health coverage. Medicare doesn't cover dentist visits for seniors. Medicaid coverage of dental benefits varies by state, with   providing comprehensive coverage to adults. Cosmetic reasons aside, there are lots of legitimate reasons to visit the dentist. The mouth, for one, is a weirdly good indicator of overall health. Inflamed gums, for example, can be an  of a number of significant diseases, including HIV, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Gum disease, left unchecked, can lead to bigger health problems. It's considered  for example, for stroke and heart attack. Federal research shows that people who earn less than 200 percent of the poverty line (about $22,000 for an individual) are significantly less likely to see the dentist. One in five low-income Americans hasn't had a teeth cleaning in five or more years. Tooth loss is an especially prevalent issue among low-income seniors – the same demographic that has fewer dentist visits. Forty-four percent of seniors living below the poverty line have no natural teeth left     These numbers stand to improve dramatically in coming decades; the dental care that kids receive now is really different (and improved) from the dental care that seniors were receiving in the 1950s. But there's still lots of people not getting much dental care at all. There's lots of price variation, among dentists, too. Using insurance claims, they found that a dental exam can cost between $27 and $183 (keep in mind these are rates negotiated by insurance companies, not necessarily the ones available to individuals). Adding on x-rays can cost between $60 and $250. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 