How Massachusetts screwed up Obamacare
Which makes it baffling that Massachusetts did arguably the worst of any state in implementing Obamacare. Like a handful of ardent Obamacare supporters in other states, Massachusetts officials tried to pull off an ambitious launch — and failed badly. "It was a management failure," says Don Berwick, who previously oversaw health law implementation for the Obama administration and is currently a candidate for Massachusetts governor. "Like the federal system, the state should have thrown the best IT support into it." The state is now in talks with the Obama administration about what a transition to healthcare.gov would look like — and is also exploring whether it can work with a different technology vendor to build a new site.  "There aren't a lot of options," says Sarah Iselin,  This was not Massachusetts' plan. The state spent years trying to build what they hoped would be the country's most advanced marketplace. What got in their way, state officials and outside experts say, were poor management, a too-ambitious agenda, and a failed relationship with its main technology vendor, CGI — the same company that managed the failed launch of healthcare.gov. Massachusetts' prior experience running an exchange may have turned into a distinct disadvantage, some say: it led the state to underestimate how different — and challenging — building an Obamacare exchange would be. "They had a website up and running and there might have been some thinking like, 'How much more difficult can this be?'" says John McDonough, a Harvard professor who worked on both the Massachusetts and federal reform laws. (He is not affiliated with the Connector.) "It was a bigger leap from the pre-ACA site to the ACA site and some people might have underestimated the challenge." Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images News Massachusetts' health care law and the Affordable Care Act are, policy-wise, quite similar. But technologically, the two programs are light years apart. Both laws rely on a three crucial policies to expand private insurance coverage. The first is opening the individual insurance market to everybody, no longer letting insurers turn away customers because they have a costly health condition. The second is a requirement for everyone to buy insurance — the individual mandate — which is a tool to ensure that both sick and healthy people enter the newly expanded market. The last prong is financial help for middle- and low-income Americans: if the government is going to require people to buy a health plan, it needs to use subsidies to make it affordable. After Massachusetts passed its health insurance reforms in 2006, the state set up a basic website called the Health Connector. Under Obamacare, that manual experience doesn't fly. Federal regulations require that shoppers be able to find out in real-time whether they qualify for subsidized health insurance, and go on to purchase a plan. "In some ways it's harder to rehab your house when you're still living it," Jon Kingsdale, the Connector's first executive director, says. Massachusetts' wanted to build a more complex marketplace than other states were attempting.  For example: There were three agencies working on the launching the new exchange: MassHealth (the state Medicaid program), the Connector, and Massachusetts Medical School. One audit report from December 2012, which showed the project already behind schedule, cited "inefficient communication" between those three agencies as one reason for the delays. "There wasn't a single point of management," Gruber says. "It was poorly set up and it was this horrible combination where the contractor would get different orders, and would do none of them." The last challenge was a rocky relationship between Massachusetts and its lead technology vendor, CGI.  "We had the wrong vendor partner...and that wrong partner failed us, leaving us where we are today," Iselin says. Either way, by last summer it was becoming clear that the Massachusetts Connector wasn't going to be ready for relaunch on October 1, the day it needed to be compliant with Obamacare. On October 1, the Health Connector relaunched as an Obamacare-compliant marketplace. It looked a lot like healthcare.gov: completely dysfunctional. Shoppers who wanted to buy health insurance with a subsidy — including those attempting to renew plans they had purchased on the Connector in 2013 —  The federal government largely fixed healthcare.gov's technological problems by December. But the Massachusetts Connector still wasn't working — and, into 2014, there was a backlog of nearly 75,000 paper and digital applications still waiting to be processed. Massachusetts now ranks 49th in the country in the percent of people eligible to use the exchange who have enrolled, only beating out South Dakota and Iowa. One key reason Massachusetts has low enrollment is that it has hundreds of thousands of residents on transitional coverage: short-term programs run by either private insurers or the state. These are bridge programs for people who ran into technological difficulties purchasing coverage, and Massachusetts is the only state using them. "We've done the problem-solving for most people," says Whitcomb Slemer, of Health Care for All, in an interview on May 8. "To my knowledge, as of last night, we don't have any outstanding cases of people waiting to get signed up or get care." "After successfully launching systems in other states, CGI continues to deliver critical capabilities and functionality for the Connector," says Linda Odorisio, CGI's vice president of global communications.  "At the same time, we stand ready to leverage this experience in support of Massachusetts' latest deployment plan." The state is now exploring whether it can work with a different technology vendor called hCentive to build a new site or whether it will transition to healthcare.gov. Massachusetts estimates that the new exchange will cost   — and none of the options on the table, Iselin says, are perfect. "There's a compressed timeline because the next open enrollment starts November 15, and that's not a date we can move," she says. "We need to figure out what we can realistically implement and what will provide the best value." Massachusetts was unique in that it was transitioning from a pre-existing health care marketplace to a new one. But the challenges it faced, some outside experts say, did show up in other states that also pursued ambitious health reform agendas. Oregon, which recently defaulted to the federal exchange, was a firm supporter of the health care law, as was Maryland, which has also had to scrap its state marketplace. "The states that ran into the biggest trouble had the grandest ambitions," Harvard's McDonough says. "In hindsight, that looks like the wrong strategy." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 