Arkansas and Michigan prove Republicans can compromise on Medicaid
Most state decisions about whether to participate in Obamacare's Medicaid expansion have fallen along partisan lines. Nearly every state with a Democratic governor has opted to expand the public program; nearly every state with a Republican governor hasn't. But a few states have mustered bipartisan support to move forward on Medicaid — mostly by petitioning the Obama administration for really big changes to how the public program works. This wasn't how the Medicaid expansion was supposed to work: the health care law initially required all states to expand the program to everyone below 138 percent of the federal poverty line (about $15,000 for an individual). But the Supreme Court ruled that part of the law was unconstitutional, and allowed each state to decide whether to opt into the expansion. That means some   still lack access to affordable coverage because their states are refusing expansion — access that new research suggests  . "Stakeholders indicate it will be easier to convince resistant legislators to consider reforming rather than simply   Medicaid," writes David K. Jones and coauthors in a recent  . Which means that Medicaid waivers — the federal government's main tool to reform the program — might be key to getting more Republican states on board. Instead of putting new beneficiaries into the traditional program, Arkansas received permission to use its Medicaid dollars to put new beneficiaries into private plans on the health exchange. The private option covers much of the cost sharing (premiums, deductibles, and co-pays) for its beneficiaries. Arkansas is trying something completely new with Medicaid — and its hard to know right now whether it can deliver on the improved outcomes state officials hope to achieve. "The question of whether bringing everyone into the same network will improve access and utilization is a great question to ask, but we actually don’t know the answer," Alan Weil, executive director of the National Academy for State Health Policy, said at the same briefing. "We may think we know the answer, but we don’t." The state's Republican governor, Rick Snyder, announced his support for the Medicaid expansion in early 2013, but he had to work with a reluctant conservative legislature to authorize expansion. Snyder signed the expansion into law last September, and the state received waiver approval from the federal government in late December. The state may use other incentives for healthy behavior in the future; those are still being finalized. Enrollees who complete the assessment and comply with healthy behavior standards will be rewarded with smaller co-pays. Arkansas and Michigan have both seen robust enrollment through their expanded Medicaid programs. So far, Arkansas has enrolled over 150,000 individuals into the private option; the state estimated that private option enrollment would top out at 250,000. Private option beneficiaries skew younger than the typical exchange population — which is good news for insurers. Having more young adults in the exchange may  their premiums for next year, according to Arkansas's Surgeon General Joe Thompson. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 