What to make of the IRS's latest Obamacare move
It's important to be clear as to what this ruling does and doesn't do. It doesn't prohibit or even penalize employers from sending their employees to purchase insurance marketplaces. It just clarifies that any additional money businesses offer employees to help them buy insurance will be taxed like normal wages. But to understand the commotion around this ruling you need to understand what the Obama administration's health wonks fear most: employer dumping. Obamacare requires large employers, defined as those who have 50 or more full-time employees, to offer health insurance to all of their employees or else   starting in 2015. The health insurance has to meet certain minimum standards with regard to how generous the benefits are and how expensive the monthly premium can be as a share of the employee's income. And g Most big employers currently offer insurance. But the fear is that t Employers can still cease offering health insurance and dump their employees into the exchanges. What the IRS said they can't do is  In other words, if employers want to give their workers more money to buy health insurance on the exchanges, that money will be taxed just like normal wages would be. The only way for employers to spend on health insurance tax free is to offer the insurance themselves. There's no hard evidence showing a trend among large businesses to move their workers from employer-sponsored coverage to state exchanges. The closest is  There are also   of employers scaling back hours so that employees count as part-time, not full-time, absolving employers of their responsibility to provide health coverage. However, this trend has yet to show up in  . This ruling from the IRS actually changes very little. Employers might still drop insurance coverage and direct their employees to the health insurance exchanges — they just can't keep claiming a tax preference if they do so. It will be several years, at least, before we can judge how pervasive this trend actually is, and how it affects businesses and their workers. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 