9 ways the Family Guy/Simpsons crossover was a blight on humanity
Look. Nobody was expecting the  /  crossover that aired last night to be any good. For one thing, it was technically an episode of  , and whatever spirit or creativity that show had was long ago wrung dry. For another, when was the last time you saw a crossover event that was anything other than a cheap cash-in? The odds were against this from the first. But still. What could be expected here was mostly just a weird mediocrity, a blip of a footnote in both shows' histories. What nobody could have expected was a blight on humanity itself. But that's what we got. Here's a brief list of the episode's most awful, awful moments. Look, yes,   is known for its ultra-violent chicken fights, for its endless repetition of gags that worked at one time, and for gags that go on too long, seemingly just to pad out episodes. But seven minutes of Homer and Peter beating each other up, spreading action-movie chaos throughout Springfield, also featuring Homer biting Peter in the crotch, before he collapses and foams at the mouth? Please no more. Yes, this happened. Yes, it also went on  . This is one of  's longest running gags, and having Lisa befriend Meg made it seem as if the Griffin daughter might finally find a true friend. But the scene concluded with Peter yelling, from offscreen, "Shut up, Meg! You don't matter!" It would be one thing if this gag had ever been funny, but it's just not, and the show keeps turning to it. And Meg's saxophone, the new thing that might bring her joy, got thrown in the trash. Ugh. Actually, a couple of these were funny, but the show returned to that well again and again and again, as if trying to make penance for something. Look, we    , the best show in the Fox animated bloc, has trouble holding its own in the ratings. But did the episode have to point this out in an elaborate gag involving World War 1 biplanes? (Though Cleveland crashing and burning was kind of amusing, if you remember  .) Whether it was Stewie locking the guy in a cage for a cheap laugh or the line "I come from a country where the word for sewage and beverage are the same," the show treated Apu, a rich, developed character on his own show, like the punchline to a joke told in 1972. Yes, this also happened. (Really, this list could just be "everything the show had Peter and Homer do together.") At this point,   is trying so hard to cheekily offend that it's long since moved past being transgressively funny   past being genuinely offensive. Now, it's just tired when Brian wants to see Lois's breasts, or the show has Stewie make a rape joke in a prank call to Moe's. The Griffins have to escape Quahog because Peter has riled up a bunch of bloggers with his occasionally misogynistic comic strip. It's meant to be a commentary on the easy offense taken at shows like   by people on the internet, but it mostly comes off as pointless gloating by a show that seemingly can't believe it's crossed the decade mark. Or, put another way, when   aired a 12-day marathon of every episode it had ever made, it was greeted with warmth and nostalgia. It's hard to imagine that happening with  , a show that has pretty much just given up and started rubbing our noses in the inexplicable fact that it still exists and is reasonably popular. Happy TV season, everybody. Let's all find something else to watch. This piece originally indicated Peter and Homer stole the gasoline they drank from the hose, but, indeed, they paid for it. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 