The Flash had a giant twist last night. Here's an explanation.
The Flash If you're one of the 4.5 million who tuned in, you were treated to some  . If you stuck around until the end, you were also treated to one of the bigger twists on television this fall — one that might have left you with some questions. But you're in luck!   is based on a comic and the comic can provide some answers to those questions. Here, then, is a comic book explanation to   scene and the show's numerous Easter eggs: At the end of the first episode, Dr. Harrison Wells (Tom Cavanagh) is seen getting up from his wheelchair and entering a secret room. It's the "what the hell is happening" moment of an episode already filled with weather manipulation, super-charged lightning bolts hitting young men, super-speed powers, and comas that give you abs.   
 The CW The show's creators and producers have been playing coy about Wells's fascination with and possible involvement in the Flash's disappearance, but the paper is a clear nod to what's known in the DC universe as an event called  (1985) The "Red Skies Vanish" headline is also a hint to the event. That story, a cross-over of epic proportions was one of DC's most important. Editorially, it was needed to reboot many characters. At the time, DC had trouble with continuity and keeping its characters and conflicts consistent. P   
 Crisis #8 (DC) That event established Allen's selflessness, but it also affected the Flash character. After Allen died, Wally West took up the mantle for years to come and formed a persona that was more sarcastic, humorous, and lighthearted than Allen's had been. A major part of West's story line, was honoring and never letting people forget Allen's courage and sacrifice. Because of budgetary constraints and licensing (the whole Justice League would have to show up), it's highly unlikely the show will tackle an actual   storyline (io9's Rob Bricken   of why). But the paper seems like a signal that the show will definitely play with an element of time travel. "As the good Doctor says, time can be rewritten, so not everything you see on the show is necessarily what's going to come to pass, and not necessarily everything that's happened is fixed," executive producer  . More importantly, it brings up questions of Wells's allegiance. Does this make Wells nefarious? Is Wells trying to stop the death from happening? Or is he trying to   it to happen?   
 (The CW) (DC)   
 Wells, Cisco Ramon and Caitlin Snow (The CW) Aside from his main love interest, Iris, Barry doesn't seem to have many friends. Over the course of the pilot, however, he seems to find some in Cisco Ramon (Carlos Valdes) and Caitlin Snow (Danielle Panabaker), two of Wells's assistants. In the comics, these two characters end up being fixtures in the DC universe. Cisco "Paco" Ramon eventually turns into a hero who can manipulate sonic and molecular vibration named Vibe. When he was introduced in the '80s, he felt a little bit like a token character, since he was a Latino breakdancer. But in the last two years, he has been fleshed out, given more attention, and his own ( ) solo book:   
 (DC) Snow, who is the more serious scientist of the two, is equally intriguing because Caitlin Snow is a villain called Killer Frost in the comic books. Killer Frost is a DC flagship villain who has many different incarnations in the comics.   and freeze stuff, but she needs heat to survive:   
 (DC) Because Snow needs heat, she's usually facing off against a hero named Firestorm. And it just so happens that the show   (cousin of   star Stephen Amell) as Firestorm for an appearance on the show.   
 (The CW) Well, the yellow flash who appears in the opening scenes when Barry's mother is murdered is a nod to Professor Zoom (he also goes by the less-cool codename Reverse-Flash), who is one of Flash's main nemeses. In the comics, Zoom has the power to manipulate the time around him, giving him the power of super speed. He also wears a yellow suit, hence a yellow blur:   
 The Flash (vol. 1) -139 ( )   Professor Zoom's real name is Eobard Thawne. There is no character on the television show named Eobard, but Allen's main rival for the love of Iris West is a man named   (Rick Cosnett). There hasn't been a clear confirmation that the yellow blur is, in fact, Professor Zoom (the creators want you to keep watching, after all) or how much Eddie is connected to Zoom, but there are enough coincidences here to tell you that the relationship between Allen and Eddie is probably not going to be a friendly one. The other fun Easter egg is an allusion to the great supervillain Gorilla Grodd, a gorilla with genius intellect and a telepathic powers. There's a scene showing Grodd's busted cage:   
 (The CW) A thing to keep in mind is that the show has no obligation to keep itself in line with the source material. It   give us a psychic gorilla or an awesome Killer Frost, but that might not mean it can, budgetarily, or even that it wants to. Anything can happen here, and that makes the show just as fun for Flash fans and newbies alike. An earlier version of this story referred to Robbie Amell as Stephen Amell's brother. Stephen is actually Robbie's cousin. The post has been updated to reflect that correction. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 