Meet the woman who's taking on the sexism of the comic book industry and winning
"Is this the hill you want to die on?" That's the question Kelly Sue DeConnick asked during a conversation with a fan at Vulture's Female Fandom panel at New York Comic Con on Friday. DeConnick, self-described as big in hair and small in stature, is the inspiring avatar of feminism of the comic world. She's best known for turning Marvel's Captain Marvel  a character previously known for being sexy window dressing on The Avengers, into a hero whose courage and leadership stemmed from her experience as an Air Force pilot. DeConnick was advising a young woman who complained that a male comic book troll at her local comic book store would challenge her to nerd pissing matches — for example being asked if she knew when Captain America's birthday fell — whenever she came to pick up her comics. Captain America's birthday was the hill this guy was willing to die on. And there are plenty of unnamed men like him. Even though there has been a push in recent years for more female characters and more female heroes with solo series, and even though the female readership in comics has been growing steadily, there are still pockets of animosity and resentment from men who consider themselves comics gatekeepers, men whom the industry has traditionally catered to. DeConnick, alongside Marvel editors like Sana Amanat ( ) or the legendary Gail Simone ( ,  ) at DC Comics are role models female comic fans can turn to when faced with this adversity. What makes this doubly puzzling is that comics, as long as they have existed, have (though the industry  ) been stories about outcasts, often read by people considered outcasts (until very recently). They have been about understanding and appreciating outsiders. Yet, the bullied become the bullies — and turn this supposed safe space into a place where they have to prove their worth. "No one gets to make you feel less than," DeConnick continued, asking the young woman —now in tears — to come up on stage for a hug. "No one gets to make you feel that they can decide what you can like. Nobody."   
 Captain Marvel #1 (Marvel) "I'm always surprised at how the book [Captain Marvel] comes up as being a paradigm-changer.  I don't think of it as that different," DeConnick wrote to me over email last month, explaining the thought process behind Carol Danvers a.k.a. Captain Marvel, and the praise that the book has received. " "She's the reason that I love Captain Marvel. And the funny thing is, it's not the type of series that I would have found on my own," said Amanda Bryman, one of DeConnick's diehards who waited more than an hour. Bryman says she found DeConnick through Tumblr and Twitter and didn't know much about the character, except that she had a lot of "bad stuff done to her in the 80s." One of those things that happened to Danvers was a storyline featuring a bizarre incest rape, where Danvers, at the time known as Ms. Marvel, was taken prisoner in different dimension, abused by a villain named Immortus, and found herself eight months pregnant. Her teammates think it's swell that she's having a baby. And it all ends in one  . When DeConnick took the helm of   in 2012, Danvers' storyline underwent a core-shaking shift and became an exploration of leadership and whether Danvers could take over the original Captain Marvel's title. DeConnick    "She's becoming a huge force in the Marvel Universe," Bryman told me. "And she's not a 'female superhero.' She's just a superhero." Though Captain Marvel never became a gigantic hit, the editorial team at Marvel stood by it and the book's fans have molded DeConnick's activism and Danvers' character into a movement called the  — an intelligent community that stands for fairness, equality, kindness, and empathy. The Carol Corps provide the safe space free from the trolls that, say, try and ask you when Captain America's birthday is. And the Carol Corps is one of the biggest backers of Marvel's recent push for diversity and solo books for the company's female superheroes.   
 Carol Corps/Kamala Korps with DeConnick at a comic convention (Pat Loika via Flickr) Marvel's increased diversity and increased awareness of its female characters have also had a positive effect on readership.  , a reboot of Danvers' original title and comic, now follows a teenage, Muslim, Pakistani-American girl named Kamala Khan (who has her own movement called the Kamala Korps). Written by the talented G. Willow Wilson, and edited by Sana Amanat,  recently went into its sixth printing (a first printing is like a first edition; a sixth reprinting signifies massive success) — virtually unheard of for a comic, let alone a female-led comic. Marvel, with its rich roster of female characters and creators, has made comic books accessible for women who were used to seeing female heroes serve as high-functioning blow-up dolls and throwaway story lines. And women are coming back to comics — according to a   at Emerald City Comic Con this year, a little more than half identified as female.   
 Danvers taking on the big bad Thanos (Marvel) "I am willing to make other people uncomfortable, so my daughter won't have to," DeConnick, said to deafening cheers. On Saturday, almost a year to the day later, DeConnick was the veteran, no longer the new, surprise superstar. The number of people in the audience seem to have doubled since the year before, and the number of female editors, writers, and artists on stage doubled too with a few fresh faces. There were also new comic books too.   didn't exist a year prior. Neither did Storm's solo series, nor were the   and   books.   and  's Wilson is going to write an arc on the all-female X-book. The spotlight wasn't just on DeConnick, who sat relatively quietly on one corner of the stage, sharing the spotlight and the moment with her fellow female colleagues. But that was as it should have been. Bit by bit, the industry changes (though there's still  ). And she's there to see it change. 
 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 