Marvel wants to give us the next Hunger Games
"This is the bad-assiest thing I've ever been asked to work on in my life," Stohl said during the Women of Marvel panel on Sunday. "She is the best — the very best hot mess I know." With Stohl, Marvel gets an author who cut her teeth in superhero video games, then hit gold with her franchise, which, as of last year, has sold  , according to Publisher's Weekly. But this move is more than just having a talented author at the company's disposal. Here's why Marvel's big move (the company  two YA/chick-lit books last year) into YA industry (in 2009, the total sales of YA books surpassed ) There's a tacky little myth in the movie business that movies that feature female leads make no money. That myth and its many permutation have been proven false, most recently by the   and film treatments of YA novels. If you want to see movies (other than the dreaded   flicks) that can hold their own with Marvel's stable of blockbusters, look no further than   and  , the two biggest YA movie franchises in recent years:   
 The second installment of   franchise,  , has a domestic gross that's only a few million behind the combined domestic gross of both   movies and is higher than the highest grossing   movie. And the   franchise stands toe to toe with   and  Granted, there are some stinkers — the movie adaptation of   is just one of them — but there's plenty of potential here for Marvel to tap into a movie genre that the company hasn't explored yet. The biggest challenge for Marvel in the past few years has been trying to grow its female audience. The industry has changed bit by bit, and the company's writing stars like   ( ) and G. Willow Wilson ( ) have helped grow a supportive community of female readers. Yet, for every two steps forward for DeConnick and her colleagues, there's a controversy like the  or the continued perception that comics are primarily for male nerds. By creating a YA book, Marvel is first and foremost eliminating the overt-sexualization of women inherent in many comics because, well, there are no pictures. Y American girls read more than boys. And they have better attitudes about reading. According to   2012 Kids & Family Reading Report, the percentage of girls who read books for fun levels off in their teens, while the percentage of boys drops at every age:   
 (Scholastic) The study also found that the attitude that boys had toward reading actually improved from 2010 to 2012:   
   (Scholastic) The study found that girls' attitudes toward reading dropped. But, even with the drop, girls still had drastically better attitudes toward reading:   
 (Scholastic) This is, of course, why you see a lot of YA novels featuring themes (romance particularly) that publishers think will resonate with young women (female protagonists, love triangles, family). Black Widow could easily fit into this mold, and Marvel must be chomping at the bit to court these would-be readers. But there's more.   The bottom line is this: women and girls are reading more books than men and boys, and if statistics hold true, women are reading more YA novels than men. Marvel, of course, has a problem with growing its female readership. The company's new YA novel might be the best possible solution.   
 Ms. Marvel #1 (Marvel) has become a breakout hit and has gone into its sixth reprinting (first printings in comic books are like first editions; sixth printings are virtually unheard of) and is a monster when it comes to digital purchases. As Marvel's editor-in-chief Axel Alonso pointed out on Sunday during his panel, the sales of the book are not all from "16-year-old Pakistani Muslim girls buying the book." Those sales are happening because "everyone is buying that book." And finally, don't underestimate the power of Marvel's marketing. Everyone points to the success of  as a sterling example of Marvel defying obscurity and turning no-name heroes into household ones. But what gets swept under the rug is how Marvel used its comic books to coincide with the release of  . The first issue of the   comic (the comic like Ms. Marvel has young reader appeal) was pushed out in July, to capitalize on the   marketing push. It ended up crushing the month and selling an   in North America. While Marvel's upcoming YA novel will feature Black Widow, there's a possibility that the company could start spinning off its other characters or create brand new characters to help grow the company's empire. These novels could very well become the next  ,  , or   Or they could be something even better. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 