A hit song is usually 3 to 5 minutes long. Here's why.
All pop songs may not sound the same, but most are close to the same length. So many songs are close to three minutes long that that length has become . This lore is so popular that the Beastie Boys even  .  But where did the "three-minute rule" come from?   
 Image courtesy of Flickr Creative commons, A flat record made between 1858 and the late 1950s is called a "78" by vinyl enthusiasts and collectors. It's called that because the record spins at 78 revolutions per minute. The 78 disc severely limits the length that a song can be, because only so much music can fit onto the disc. The 78 comes in two sizes: a 10-inch that holds three minutes of music and a 12-inch that holds four. In 1949,   disk that quickly overtook the 78 and made it obsolete. These 45s were better than 78s in numerous ways. They were made of vinyl instead of shellac, which made them more durable and more easily portable. They were also cheap to make and to buy, which made them easy to   in the mid-1950s. Like the 78, the 45 also holds about three minutes of music (depending on the range of sound a song required and the depth of the groove in the disc). All of Elvis's singles were sold on 45, for instance, as did the singles of The Beatles, The Rolling Stones, and Pink Floyd. The seven-inch 45 single carried rock and roll, Motown, R&B, psychedelia,   the British Invasion into American households.   
 Image courtesy of Flickr Creative commons, ( ) It makes sense to assume that since the basis of the three-minute song was the 78 and then 45 rpm single, then songs would become longer as technology evolved. And there have, of course, been bands that wrote songs longer than four minutes even before the music industry switched to CDs.    
 Average song length by year. Data courtesy of MusicBrainz.org   , we can determine the average length of a song based on the year of its release. It would be easy to say that as new technologies have been developed that allow for longer music, the length of songs has increased.  "What drives what is heard on the radio is an artist's desire to have their music hit the mainstream, and a record label's desire to profit from that," Steve Jones, vice president at the Canadian radio firm Newcap Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 