How Gail Simone changed the way we think about female superheroes
  
 (DC Comics)   , comics creator Gail Simone made this now-famous observation and detailed the numerous female characters in comics history who were de-powered, maimed, raped, and left altered on what's become  . What male comic book writers did with women and refrigerators, Simone has been doing to shopworn female stereotypes since she started her comic book writing career at the turn of the millennium. From her stint at   and her gritty, career-defining era on to her brilliant run on the anti-hero group known as the and her chewier, very popular   and upcoming return on  Simone has changed the way we think of female characters in comics. Simone's fearlessness is woven into her writing. When talking about female characters, the general conversation often meanders into a debate of what sorts of representation are good and bad for women. Simone doesn't seem to care about this argument, so much as she cares about writing characters who are flawed, who fail, who aren't afraid of being dark, and who don't live on a pedestal. Equality, in Simone's eyes, is letting women in comic book stories being as wicked, marred, and sexual as the men in comic books are allowed to be. Equality is giving female characters as much of their own agency as men get. One of the more moving stories Simone has told was that of Batgirl (in one of the more controversial events in the comics business, Simone was abruptly and  and then  ) . Like Batman, Batgirl had her back broken. But unlike Batman, she had to live through it. "Less than a year later, Batman was fine. Batgirl — now named Oracle — was in a wheelchair and remained so for many years," Simone told  . Simone used Batgirl's story to craft a thoughtful story about the PTSD she suffered after her attack, the trauma of her recovery, and the ugliness that we often forget about when we talk about resilience. That attack lived with her for years, making a home in her subconscious. We got to see the consequences of what are usually inconsequential superhero fights, a glimpse into a damaged character that    
 (DC Comics) Simone has since wrapped up her run on  and is now focusing on the December relaunch of  , a comic that follows a group of antiheroes, villains really, with plenty of emotional and physical scar tissue. Catman, a villain and anti-hero in the DCU will be one of the characters Simone will be writing. She might be talking about Catman's sexuality.   that she wanted to but was unable to write about Catman's bisexuality during her previous run on  , and would be exploring this theme when she brought him back. Seeing what Simone could do with that story and what kind of treatment she would give villains like his fellow team members, Black Alice, Strix, and Ventriloquist (only four of the Secret Six have been announced), has plenty of her fans excited.   
 (DC Comics) It's been over 15 years since Simone made that observation about women in refrigerators. There are still moments where comics readers are quickly reminded of how far there is left to go.  , DC licensed t-shirts that portrayed Wonder Woman as one of Superman's sexual conquests and a t-shirt sold to girls and young women that said "training to be Batman's wife." Training to be Batman's pointy hat. Many of those women frequently cite Simone's work on  , an all-female super hero team, and consider her an inspiration. It's something that never gets old for her. "I was always told I would never make a living writing," she tells me toward the end of our conversation, explaining what makes it so satisfying to hear that women are slowly making their mark in the industry, even at more  And thanks to her groundbreaking work, Simone's voice will always be one of them. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 