Wonder Woman is finally getting her own movie
 (the years should stay solid, but the dates may change): The news is aggressive, exciting, and brash — it's basically the cinematic equivalent of a wrestler leaping off the top rope. Here's are some brief reasons why comic fans are losing their minds today.   
 (DC) In the comic book industry, a persistent  has been when a solo, iconic female superhero movie would be produced. T   
 A Wonder Woman movie answers that question and finally gives fans a date to look forward to. DC is also beating Marvel — traditionally seen as the more progressive, and female-friendly company when it comes to the Big Two — to the punch. There had long been  that Marvel might create a Captain Marvel movie, but that hasn't come to fruition just yet. And though   that it had plans for a female superhero-led movie in August, no character has been named. Critics and amateur sexists will point out that there have been some female-led box office clunkers (see:   and  ) in the past (sometimes ignoring the trove of terrible    ). And questions of quality, casting, and filmmaking are going to be valid going forward. But for now, fans — like DC's Gail Simone, who wrote Wonder Woman — are happy that a Wonder Woman movie is being made. Tomorrow. I will be skeptical tomorrow. Today, WONDER WOMAN MOVIE. 
 
   
 (DC) A lot of those names heading up the list of upcoming movies are familiar. The most obscure movie on the list is the  . For the unfamiliar (and this might sound familiar), the Suicide Squad is a team of rag-tag villains and outcasts who were originally brought together by the U.S. government to perform dangerous and clandestine missions in exchange for shaving years off of their prison sentences. Is this just   with supervillains? Kind of, yes. The comic, more or less, has become an antihero narrative not unlike the .    
   (DC) When you look at The Avengers movies, it's a random bunch of white men and one white woman who are saving the world. Samuel L. Jackson's Nick Fury and Cobie Smulders's Maria Hill, aren't technically part of the core team of Avengers.  DC has already cast Jason Momoa, a.k.a.  's Khal Drogo, as Aquaman, who is usually depicted as someone who looks more like Alexander Skarsgard or Alex Pettyfer. Cyborg, as he is depicted in the comics, is a black man and will be played by  . Dwayne Johnson, a.k.a. "The Rock," is playing the villain  in  . And there's also opportunity for Warner Bros./DC to add another non-white character in the Green Lantern —there are many different versions of The Green Lantern, a popular version is a man named  . DC and Warner Bros. have come to play. Let the gossip and dream casting (Jesse Williams as Green Lantern, please!) commence. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 