Oscar de la Renta died last night. Here are his best first lady dresses.
Oscar de la Renta, the American designer popular among A-list celebrities, died Monday at the age of 82. The designer is known for dressing famous women for the red carpet, and for his beautiful wedding dress designs, such as the one he most recently created for . But Oscar de la Renta was also a favorite among America's first ladies. H   
 Nancy Reagan visits her red dress collection at the Reagan Presidential Library (Bob Riha Jr / Getty) Nancy Reagan was known for her beloved red dresses. At her husband's Presidential Library a display is set up to show a few of her favorites. The dress on the right, with the long lace puff sleeve and v-neck bodice is an Oscar de la Renta design worn by Nancy Reagan at the 1988 president's dinner where Reagan endorsed George H. W. Bush's candidacy for president. It was one of several de la Renta pieces Reagan wore during her husband's presidency.   
 Hillary Clinton on the cover of Vogue magazine (Annie Lebovitz/Vogue)       
 First lady Laura Bush at the Liberty Ball inside the Washington Convention Center as part of the inaugural festivities January 20, 2005 in Washington, DC. ( Travis Lindquist/Getty Images) Oscar de la Renta was a solidly bi-partisan designer, beloved by Hillary Clinton and Laura Bush alike. Bush wore a floor-length silver gown to President Bush's 2005 inaugural ball. In   after the designer's death, Bush said, "My daughters and I have many fond memories of visits with Oscar, who designed our favorite clothes, including Jenna's wedding dress. We will always remember him as the man who made women look and feel beautiful." A photo posted by Nneya Richards (@doublenrich) on  
 
 Unlike her predecessors, Michelle Obama has been hesitant to embrace de la Renta as the de facto designer of first ladies' gowns. Instead, she favored designers like Michael Kors, Jason Wu, or even J. Crew, which did not  But in early October, less than two weeks before his death,  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 