Everything you ever wanted to know about Doctor Who, but were too embarrassed to ask
There's good reason for this: This premiere features not just the debut of a new season, but also the return of the latest Doctor, played by  , one of the best actors of his generation and someone who once seemed a decidedly odd choice for the role. The Doctor has been played by men of Capaldi's age — 56 — before; until now, he had never been played by a man whose best-known role was as foul-mouthed as Capaldi's  . But Capaldi has proved an enormously capable Doctor, giving a tremendously funny, occasionally manic performance that also taps into the character's rage issues. He's worth checking out. The show itself is struggling, but there's plenty of great stuff in its past worth catching up on. You may be vaguely aware of  , but you also might feel intimidated by just how much history there is to the show, and feel like you'd have to watch 34 seasons of television to get caught up. To which we would say a.) don't and b.) you couldn't even if you wanted to. To that end, consider this quick guide to the world of  . He's the Doctor, that's who! Right, but that's the joke. Get it? The character is known only as "the Doctor," and thus, the title of the show is a question: Doctor  ?! But nobody really has asked that question since, like, season one of the show, so you'd be forgiven for thinking this an elaborate, medical-themed riff on the "Who's on First" routine. He's a time-traveling alien from the planet Gallifrey. He makes his way through all of space and time in a spaceship/time machine shaped like a British police box (think of a blue phone booth). This vehicle is called  , which is short for Time and Relative Dimension in Space. It should be able to assume any form but somehow broke and got stuck on the police box. The TARDIS is larger on the inside than it appears to be on the outside, and it's the greatest vehicle known to man (or alien). The Doctor and the TARDIS are the two constants of the program, even if the former has been played officially by 12 different actors. (He's also been played by other actors in other instances, but let's not wander too far into the weeds here.)   
 The first 11 Doctors (BBC) When original Doctor   was ailing toward the end of his run on the show, the series' producers hit upon something ingenious: Since the Doctor was an alien,  . This was known as the Doctor's "regeneration." Hartnell was replaced by  , and a terrific way to periodically refresh the program was discovered. (For more on Hartnell and the early days of  , check out 2013's excellent TV movie  .) Matt Smith regenerated into Peter Capaldi at the end of December 2013's Christmas special.   
 Peter Capaldi is the new Doctor. (BBC America) But the show also isn't hokey, ultimately, because it carries with it the ultimate blank canvas. A   story can, essentially, be about  . The potential for the show's setting is limitless, which is what makes it so enduring.   
 Matt Smith's Eleventh Doctor (center) and his companions face down the Daleks in an earlier episode. (BBC America) You're talking about  , a species of merciless killing machines and the Doctor's greatest foe. Watching Capaldi yell at Daleks is a highlight of his tenure. Hello and welcome to the Internet. Of course they do.   
 Matt Smith (left) and David Tennant teamed up for the 50th anniversary special. (BBC America) No, and every new Doctor that's revealed to be a white dude prompts greater and greater irritation with this fact. That   before Capaldi's tenure was announced, and it didn't really go away, even when a much-loved actor like Capaldi was named to the role. Showrunner Steven Moffat  , which speaks to some of his seasons' larger issues with roles for women. Somewhat.   always comes in for criticism, sometimes because of legitimate problems and sometimes because   fans are intensely devoted to their program of choice. But the issues   with Moffat's female characters are particularly troubling. Moffat's a sterling storyteller, and his seasons have ingenious clockwork structures that the Doctor has to deduce. But this means that for the most part, his female characters (usually the companions, but also River Song, a love interest for the Doctor) are reduced from human beings who drive the story forward to plot devices the Doctor has to figure out. Moffat writes superficially strong women, who have facility with a quip and are able to think their way out of sticky situations, but they also tend to be reduced to damsels in distress when it comes right down to it, and they react to hugely emotional situations — like, say, having their child taken from them — in largely unbelievable ways. The question is whether this is specifically a problem with Moffat's writing for women or more a problem with his writing of characters who aren't the Doctor, and it would seem to skew more toward the latter. For one thing, Moffat has written interesting, believable female characters on   shows, like his much-loved sitcom  . For another, Moffat clearly just really loves the Doctor and seemingly would prefer to write only for him a lot of the time. Well,  , thanks to the BBC recording over them. We have audio tapes of them, which have been matched to production stills, but it's not the same, is it? So you can't watch   of  . And you might not want to anyway. This leaves you with three options. We're going to go with five from the new series. Episodes from the older series are generally best worked into after indulging in the more modern show.   
 Jenna Coleman plays Clara. (BBC America) Yes! And it has its problems. Though Capaldi remains a terrific Doctor, Moffat's approach to the show increasingly feels like having the Doctor Who Wiki read to you at an alarming speed. Since Clara's there, she can ask all the same questions the audience might have, but it still feels as if Moffat is spinning his wheels just a little bit, trapped in a long series of puzzles of his own invention. (At one point, the Doctor enters a gladiatorial arena on a tank, playing an electric guitar, seemingly because someone involved in the show saw  .) The new series has rather beaten the Daleks to death, but this premiere features many, many more of them. It all feels like an endless retread. But if you're the kind of person who thinks they might like  , then you are almost certainly someone who will like  , warts and all. And complaining about the show's current direction is a time-honored tradition within the fandom, as you'd expect for a show with 34 seasons of history behind it. Go ahead and hop on board the bandwagon.   
 Jenna Coleman and Peter Capaldi star in Doctor Who. (BBC America) Sort of. The Eighth Doctor was a one-off TV movie character whom Moffat   to celebrate the Doctor's 50th anniversary last year. Played by Paul McGann, he was British, sure, but he was meant to be the lead of a new series to air on Fox, rather than the BBC, and that TV movie (from 1996) was the pilot for that prospective series. Fortunately, nobody seemed too interested in a   that would be an American co-production, so we didn't have to bear the indignity of this show being on Fox. Yeah, you're probably right. [if gte mso 9]><xml> 0   0   1   1871   10665   Vox Media   88   25   12511   14.0 </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 9]><xml> Normal   0               false   false   false      EN-US   JA   X-NONE </xml><![endif] [if gte mso 9]><xml> </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 10]>
<style>
 /* Style Definitions */
table.MsoNormalTable
	{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0in;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}
</style>
<![endif] Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 