Captain Marvel and Black Panther, Marvel's newest movie superheroes, explained
Names like Black Panther and Captain Marvel mean a lot to comic book fans who have been waiting anxiously for their arrivals on the big screen. But to people whose only exposure to Marvel's characters are the movies, many of these projects can feel foreign or hard to grasp. For newbies and fans alike, here's a brief breakdown of Tuesday's big announcements:   
 (Marvel)  May 6, 2016   
 (Marvel) Black Panther is a hero named T'Challa, king of a fictional African country called Wakanda. At first glance, the name Black Panther seems to recall the Black Panther Party, but the character   and was created three months before the Party was founded. The character, however, doesn't predate the black panther logo of the Black Panther Party's previous incarnation, the   organization or the WWII Black Panthers Tank Battalion. T'Challa has become one of the most influential players in the Marvel Universe. He's part of the Avengers, was married to the   in what was the biggest wedding in the Marvel Universe, is part of a secret cabal known as the Illuminati. He has also had stints in superhero teams like the Fantastic Four. Black Panther is given his powers by an entity called the Panther God. Those powers include amping up his physical prowess and senses, making him a physical and acrobatic wonder not unlike Daredevil, Beast, or Spider-Man. Panther is also smart (  from Oxford) and has access to Wakanda's most prominent resource, a special, powerful metal called vibranium (the metal found in Captain America's shield) that augments his weapons and uniform. Marvel will also have the potential to show us a very different view of an African country.   of dumbing down African countries and the people who live there as uncivilized, rural, "wild," and corrupt. And though there is corruption and wildlife in some African countries (as well as American states and European countries too), there are also modern cities like Nairobi, Cairo, and Lagos, which Hollywood often ignores. Wakanda, in the comics, is a wealthy country that retains its tribal culture. Black Panther has been responsible in modernizing the country with factories and his knowledge of physics and tech.  , it's become one of the most technologically sophisticated places on earth.  Black Panther has already been cast. Chadwick Boseman, who played Jackie Robinson in  , will be Marvel's Black Panther. Given his natural charisma, he should be a great fit for the part.  November 3, 2017   
 Captain Marvel is a name that many characters have taken up throughout Marvel's history. But in this case, Captain Marvel is referring to Carol Danvers, who took up the title  Captain Marvel, under  , has become as much a story about the character's development as it is about her adventures. Prior to DeConnick's arrival on the book, Danvers went by the name Ms. Marvel and had a skimpier superhero outfit — a high-cut leotard with a ribbon as a belt. DeConnick bucked that image, tapped into the hero's stint in the Air Force, and made her a space captain that fights for respect from The Avengers and leads them into battle. The comic isn't just an exploration about leadership. It also explores how Danvers wants to honor the previous Captain Marvel and what the title means to her.   
 Captain Marvel #1 (Marvel)   
 (Marvel) Captain Marvel will be the first film about one of Marvel's female superheroes since the aggressively dismal   was released in 2005. (  was produced by 20th Century Fox, not Marvel Studios.) Thus, this movie has the chance to change the system. Because of movies like   and  , there has been a persistent myth that no one will go see a movie featuring a female superhero lead. N Captain Marvel could change the game for female superheroes. If it does well, we could see Marvel and its rivals push out more movies that don't revolve around the typical straight white guys. The  comic has already changed the comic book world. A feminist movement called the  for fans who love the character, grows each day. And at Marvel, it's helped give the company room to believe in stories l It depends on how old Marvel wants to make Danvers. If the film goes younger, the no-brainer would be Jennifer Lawrence who would have wrapped up her   contract and finished   (the supposed end of the First Class trilogy) by the time   goes into production. If Danvers is portrayed as a woman in her 30s or 40s, Marvel could do no wrong with Rosamund Pike, Jessica Chastain, or Emily Blunt. All three would add something different to the role. My editor, Todd Vanderwerff insists on Katee Sackoff. What I hope Marvel does, and what I would give them all the props in the world for if they had the guts to do it, is cast a non-white woman in the role. Casting Lupita Nyong'o, Kerry Washington, or Paula Patton as Carol Danvers would absolutely change the game. July 6, 2018.   
 (Marvel) The Inhumans are a race of superhumans that first appeared in 1965. They represent the kind of world-building that Marvel is currently doing with films like  . Before their creation, most comics had superheroes who fought supervillains on earth. The Inhumans represented beings from a different world, and the possibility of different characters inhabiting not just Earth, but every single pocket of the Marvel universe. They were also the last group of heroes that legendary artist Jack Kirby created before going to DC Comics in 1970.  They're most like the X-Men in that they share a common origin story — Inhumans get their powers after being exposed to a substance called Terrigen Mist. The mist mutates them, giving them powers but sometimes also leaving them with deformities. When people talk about the Inhumans, they are usually referring to the royal family. I wrote about the   royal family this past summer, and here's a  :   (Marvel) (Marvel) There's also the rivalry aspect. Because of licensing deals, it's unlikely that Marvel will ever reclaim the X-Men characters. And the Inhumans are the closest Marvel is going to get to X-Men-like characters. It wouldn't be a surprise to see them positioned as such — if you ask a  , it's already happening in the comics. And if you ever wanted to see what the X-Men would be like with the care, budget, and creative powers that Marvel can provide, the Inhumans would be worth checking out.  November 2, 2018   
 (Marvel) You probably know the core group. But this movie would have additions like Captain Marvel, Black Panther, Ant-Man, and Dr. Strange. Infinity #6 (Marvel)  — May 2018.  — May 2019. 
 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 