Why I'm dreading the new slate of superhero movies
Take a look at this terrific infographic of upcoming superhero films from the  :   
 A list of upcoming superhero films. ( ) And that image is missing some things. It doesn't include the many, many, many superhero TV shows on the air or in various stages of development. And it doesn't include other geek-friendly properties in active development as films, like  , the  , or Warner Brothers'  . Yet graphics like this one have sent many into paroxysms of joy. One friend of mine crowed that it's never been a better time to be a pop culture geek. And yet I look at this list — even as a pop culture geek — and see something almost  . I look at this list and see a long list of chores I'll just have to eventually get to. Don't get me wrong. I'm going to see every single one of these films. I am probably going to enjoy most of them, on one level or another. Marvel Studios has made only one outright   film — the   — and while the output from Fox, Sony, and DC has been spottier, I have a great affection for many of those characters. Plus, I'd be lying if I said that I'm not excited for the   film — especially if   somehow ends up with the part. I'm not even upset about the idea of spoilers here. Arguably, knowing that the relationship between Captain America and Tony Stark is building toward   between the two in the former's third film makes me more interested to see that film. One of the things that's interesting to me about the new mega-franchise storytelling is the way that it works in bits and pieces of other stories as fillips around the edges of the main tale. It reminds me of my beloved television, and Marvel is doing nothing if not making a huge, exciting TV show that we tune into every few months. No, what I'm reacting to here, I think, is the way that these sorts of lists and master plans remove whatever capacity geek cinema has to   us. I like to think back to the visceral thrill I felt at watching Robert Downey, Jr., revive his career in that  , or the way that Heath Ledger lit up the screen in   in ways we hadn't quite expected. Or looking beyond superhero movies, think of the way   carefully hid from audiences that it was essentially a silent film for half its running time, or how the   simply and perfectly deposited you in a world that had yet to be ruined by hype saturation. See, to me, Marvel's never made a   movie. It's come close —  , as well as the second   are all terrific examples of the form — but inevitably, the stories revert to the company's "three big fights, laced with shallow character stories and snarky humor" formula and devolve into an ending where   created in a computer hit each other with other things created in a computer. And DC's attempts to begin its own mega-franchise — beginning with the ham-fisted   — simply come off as laughable. Neither company has much room for directorial expression in their films, with talented folks ultimately making movies that get sucked into the same formulas over and over again. This has been compared to the dominance of Westerns in Hollywood in the ‘50s, but, c'mon. Can you point to a superhero version of  ? Hell, can you point to a superhero version of  ? We may be evolving in the right direction, as  , which is  , shows, but only by millimeters. No, what Marvel, especially, is very good at doing is churning out product and keeping it just enough above the quality line that we'll go back for more. That list of films above might as well be a list of fast-food hamburgers we'll be eating for the rest of the decade. It's this, I think, that makes me feel that sense of duty, that grumbling notion that I'm about to do my chores. Yes, we've always made checklists of films to see, whether to get a better understanding of the medium's history or to, say, get caught up on the best films of the year before the Oscars arrive. The difference here is that this is a list of films we are   to see, a list of films we had better start planning our lives around  , if we are going to be good movie geeks. It has nothing to do with being surprised and everything to do with being kept in a state of vague anticipation for a half-decade before watching a movie that will inevitably result in a mild feeling of anticlimax. It has everything to do with taking that surprise and leeching all of it out of our moviegoing experience, bit by bit, until finally seeing the movie is just the last chore on the list. It's a Christmas morning when we don't just know the packages but have gotten done playing with them ages ago. Don't read this as some sort of screed that mega-franchises are killing the movies. They're here to stay, obviously, and I have high hopes for what they'll accomplish in the future. There are   being made every month, and some   sneaking into the largest of blockbusters. There are   and great directors and screenwriters smuggling   into novel adaptations the studio probably only half paid attention to. Yes, franchises are taking over Hollywood, but it doesn't   to be a bad thing. [if gte mso 9]><xml> 0   0   1   960   5473   Vox Media   45   12   6421   14.0 </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 9]><xml> Normal   0               false   false   false      EN-US   JA   X-NONE </xml><![endif] [if gte mso 9]><xml> </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 10]>
<style>
 /* Style Definitions */
table.MsoNormalTable
	{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0in;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}
</style>
<![endif] This is not as simple as saying, "If you don't like these movies, don't go see them!" It's more complicated than that. It's about getting trapped in these never-ending, concentric circles of hype. It's about trying to escape the constant feeling that everything is buzz for something else — even the movies themselves. And it's about avoiding, at all costs, a world where there are no actual movies, only the suggestion of other, better movies over the horizon. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 