NaNoWriMo explained: Why hundreds of thousands of people are writing novels this month
For the entire month of November, the term   will be trending on Twitter and floating throughout the internet. A friend might utter this combination of syllables to you to explain why they can't go out. "Oh, I've gotta work on my   submission," they might say, leaving you puzzled. So what is it? The acronym stands for  tional  vel  iting  nth. It represents an annual quest embarked upon by thousands of people around the world who pledge to try to write a novel in a single month of just 30 days. The organization is part  , part literary ambition, and part religious devotion. Here's everything you need to know to understand this month of furious writing. NaNoWriMo is an annual celebration and challenge for people who want to commit to writing things. As mentioned,   is to write a novel in a single 30-day period.  It's a non-exclusive event, so anyone who is willing to make the commitment can participate by signing up at   and writing 50,000 words in a single month. The tagline for the organization is "The world needs your novel." (Whether it actually does is debatable, but that's a good thing to tell yourself when seeking motivation.) Chris Baty founded the program in 1999 with a group of 21  writers in the San Francisco Bay area. In their second year, 140 people joined their quest. In that year, Baty set up the   for the competition: 1) the writing project   instead of something previously started; 2) it has to be written by a single person; and 3) it has to be finished by midnight on November 30. The community around the program grew: launching a website, creating message boards, and founding "write-in" events for people to attend in order to catch up on their writing in long binges. Last year, more than   participated.   
 The only concrete goal of NaNoWriMo is to write  that presumably becomes a novel. (You   write a short story collection or non-fiction or something else. But then you're deemed a "rebel.") Broken down over the month of November, this means that writers have to pen 1,667 words on average per day, or about three single spaced pages in Microsoft Word.  "NaNoWriMo gave me an excuse to not care about how good the writing was, and just to sit down and write something," Zachary Ricks, a municipal liaison for the Austin, Texas NaNoWriMo group told me, "It's really the only way to finish that first draft. You can't care about how good it is. You just have to keep writing, and NaNo reminds me of that every year.​ It's been a great outlet." 50,000 words is actually pretty short. 40,000 words is generally considered to be a novella, and most published novels are longer — often much longer. The average novel length, according to Amazon's Text Stats feature, is close to 64,000 words. Here are a few famous novels close to 50,000 words: Sort of! The biggest prize   is the satisfaction one gains by finishing something that seemed big and impossible. If a writer reaches the 50,000 word mark and verifies their word count on the organization's site, they get two paperback copies of their work for free, and several subscriptions  . Mostly, winners get bragging rights. Yes! Many NaNoWriMo projects after heavy revision and rewriting are published as novels in traditional and electronic formats. Some of the most acclaimed NaNoWriMo books include:   
 No. What makes NaNoWriMo different from simply sitting in a quiet room and pledging to write a first draft of a novel is that joining NaNoWriMo places a writer inside a community of other people all trying to do the same thing. The national program hosts several online "write-ins" and a couple of bigger events, but local chapters of the program are more active, putting on in-person events to kick-off and close-out the month, as well as several events to take place throughout November. liaison When 400,000 people are writing a novel in a single month, their collective chatter about their work grows into an audible roar.  Many people participating in NaNoWriMo have no formal writing experience or training, which means that — at times — the questions they raise seem rather banal to more experienced writers. They are perfectly legitimate questions, but ones that are easy to parody and make fun of. Some of these jokes have taken hold on the internet. There are Tumblrs that call out   and the   from the forums on the site, and there are numerous parody Twitter accounts. It can be all too easy to  There is   who would certainly say so. NaNoWriMo participants have a reputation for being entitled, loud, and mildly disrespectful of traditional methods of novel writing, which often involve a lot of thoughtful contemplation, rather than manic speed writing. Yet many great books evolved out of drafts written in a single month. Like any form of art, different types of work take different amounts of time. There is nothing keeping a NaNoWriMo writer from creating a beautiful, funny, or even bestselling work of fiction. Not every writer can afford to live up to the romanticized ideal of the novelist, sitting in a tiny apartment in Greenwich Village, smoking camels and writing in long-hand on a desk beneath a plaque holding an expensive college diploma. We are not all Hemingway, and we shouldn't try to be. But everyone   afford to be a   because it's free, and 1,667 words of your first draft can be written after dinner, or after the kids have been put to sleep, or in the spare moments of a hectic lifestyle. As  said last year, NaNoWriMo forces you to  to do something you've maybe wanted to do for ages. And that's valuable. "You can't care about how good it is," Ricks told me, "you just have to keep writing, and NaNo reminds me of that every year." ! You can sign up at  . But remember you'll have to stick to a 2,500 words per day rate to finish. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 