The Lena Dunham child abuse controversy, explained
Over the course of this week, the pop culture world has been consumed with arguments over the way that director and writer Lena Dunham, creator of HBO's  , describes a childhood scene in her new book,  . The controversy began with a series of right-leaning politics sites accusing Dunham, in the scene, of sexually molesting her sister. To be clear, child psychologists who have spoken out on this say that, based on Dunham's portrayal, the incident appears innocent, not abuse or molestation. But  There are actually two sets of accusations against Dunham here, from two very different political factions. At first, those critics were principally right-wing political sites that accused Dunham of child molestation based on an episode in her book, in which she herself was a child. But then they were joined by     on the feminist left who are accusing Dunham of glossing over abuse and using her privilege as a young, white woman as a shield against criticism. In many ways, these arguments are a continuation of a larger, often-heated, and highly politicized discussion of Dunham's place in pop culture. On the right, she is often seen as the leading edge of a destructive, partisan force in changing the politics of gender and sexuality for the worst. Among some quarters of the left, s On October 29, nearly a month after Dunham's book had come out, the right-wing website Truth Revolt posted a passage from her memoir under the headline " ." That headline was coupled with a passage from Dunham's book where she describes looking at her sister's vagina: "Do we all have uteruses?" I asked my mother when I was seven. "Yes," she told me. "We're born with them, and with all our eggs, but they start out very small. And they aren't ready to make babies until we're older." I look at my sister, now a slim, tough one-year-old, and at her tiny belly. I imagined her eggs inside her, like the sack of spider eggs in Charlotte's Web, and her uterus, the size of a thimble. "Does her vagina look like mine?" "I guess so," my mother said. "Just smaller." One day, as I sat in our driveway in Long Island playing with blocks and buckets, my curiosity got the best of me. Grace was sitting up, babbling and smiling, and I leaned down between her legs and carefully spread open her vagina. She didn't resist and when I saw what was inside I shrieked. My mother came running. "Mama, Mama! Grace has something in there!" My mother didn't bother asking why I had opened Grace's vagina. This was within the spectrum of things I did. She just got on her knees and looked for herself. It quickly became apparent that Grace had stuffed six or seven pebbles in there. My mother removed them patiently while Grace cackled, thrilled that her prank had been a success. Truth Revolt really keyed on the phrase "she didn't resist," which becomes more loaded when paired with that headline. But there was another factor too: Truth Revolt's article originally stated that Dunham was 17 at the time — Dunham says she was seven — changing and charging the passage with pedophilia. Those three factors — even though one was a glaring, irresponsible mistake — were enough to lay a foundation and give people, Truth Revolt readers in particular, the idea than Dunham had abused her sister. According to the experts who have so far weighed in, no, it is not. "This is clearly not a case of abuse," developmental psychologist Ritch Savin-Williams, director of the Sex and Gender Lab at Cornell University,  . "Children have been doing this stuff forever and ever and ever and ever, and they will do it forever and ever and ever." Sam Rubenstein, a psychotherapist who specializes in childhood abuse, echoed these  : I think you have to take into consideration her age, her history, and the idea that at that age, unless you've gone through severe sexual trauma, there's really almost nothing sexual about it. The same explanation could be used for grabbing the dog's tail. It's the same type of coercion. Just because it's in the sexual venue, people want to attach something to it, but it's almost totally different. It's an innocent type of thing. John V. Caffaro, a professor at the California School of Professional Psychology and an expert on sibling abuse,   that such non-abusive interactions are normal among siblings: To be clear, sexual curiosity in children is normal. All children explore their bodies and may engage in visual or even manual exploration of a sibling at times. This is one way that children discover sexual differences between boys' and girls' anatomies. Even siblings of the same gender become curious about variations in shapes and sizes of their sex organs. Two small children exploring each other's bodies does not predestine them to a life of emotional suffering. heteronormativity deems certain behaviours harmful, and others "normal"; the state and media are always invested in maintaining that She's suggesting here that her sister's actions as a child are being unfairly judged by society. Harm, she argues, is something that people who experienced the act for determine — it's not for someone who didn't experience those things to decide: As a queer person: i'm committed to people narrating their own experiences, determining for themselves what has and has not been harmful She also addressed Lena's critics, accusing them of jumping to conclusions in a rush to chastise a young woman's experience: 2day, like every other day, is a good day to think about how we police the sexualities of young women, queer, and trans people 
 
 A few reasons. Firstly, Dunham initially reacted with a series of somewhat heated tweets that, inevitably, just drew more attention to the story: The right wing news story that I molested my little sister isn't just LOL- it's really fucking upsetting and disgusting. Usually this is stuff I can ignore but don't demean sufferers, don't twist my words, back the fuck up bros. The second reason is that, for a number of Dunham's conservative critics, this is not just about this one incident and whether or not it counts as abusive. It's about what they see as a much larger issue of Dunham's work and what it represents in the politics of gender and sexuality — more on that below. Third is the way Dunham wrote the incident up in her book, and the degree to which the writing style that has made her such a success may also have led her astray here. Child molestation is an extremely sensitive topic. Caffaro, the sibling abuse expert, wrote that sibling sexual abuse is   that most people think: "the most closely kept secret in the field of family violence," with one study finding that "at least 2.3 percent of children have been sexually victimized by a sibling." Dunham's treatment of this very serious topic was To some degree, that is of a piece with Dunham's greatest strengths and weaknesses as a writer. She has a reputation for leaning into weird, awkward situations on her HBO show  , and she's a master at creating scenes, sexual or not, that make viewers cringe. This is a book about Lena Dunham coming of age in a society that doesn't normally tell the stories of girls becoming women, and it highlights — quite well — how uncomfortable and difficult growing up as a girl can be. The story about Grace is part of that. In a November 4 statement to  , Dunham granted that some of what she wrote may have been in poor taste.  "If conservatives are going to be in the popular culture — and act to change it — they can't simply ignore shows like   that capture the zeitgeist, even if the zeitgeist makes their skin crawl,"  in January 2013, acknowledging the distaste conservatives had for  , a lot of which stemmed from the show's approach to sex, Dunham's nudity, and Dunham's portrayal of, in  A National Review writer suggested Dunham could be "helping to forward a  " that is itself "an indicator of the decline and fall of the American experiment." Some of this coverage has itself drawn criticism — accusations from the left that it's an extension of the right's "war on women," which just goes to show that the fight over Lena Dunham is about much more than just Lena Dunham. The Washington Post's   calculated that a November 3 National Review cover story about Dunham, called " ," spent two paragraphs on Dunham's body, seven talking on her sex life, five paragraphs insinuating Dunham is a false-rape-accuser, and five instances of talking about Dunham being fat. Truth Revolt's "sexual abuse" post, the post that initially accused Dunham of child molestation, was itself an aggregation of that same National Review cover story. Dunham has long had critics in some quarters of the feminist left. Those critics by and large do not believe that she molested her sister. But they do believe that this incident underscores what, for them, has long troubled them about Dunham: what they see as a rich, white woman privilege that makes her insensitive to people different from herself. Those feminists have criticized Dunham for falling well short of the feminist poster-woman status they believe she claims. They point to Dunham's past actions — under-representing or ignoring people of color on her show, making jokes about rape and molestation, outing her sister — as revealing problematic views on  The writer  , for example, pointed out that Dunham could only be as blasé as she was in her book and in her immediate reaction because of her privilege, and that Dunham's insensitivity in writing about the subject show that she uses that privilege to get away with things other people could not: A Black woman could not have written what Lena did. She would not have the space to argue context. She would not have anyone championing her. She would certainly not be given some benefit of the doubt about childhood exploration because Black people's innocence is often denied, even when we're 7. Our kids are tried as adults in the court of public opinion and in the court of law. In fact, NO person of color could have written this. Meanwhile, Lena seems to be above critique for many, and that might even be why she thought these problematic occasions should have been included in her book. It's important to remember the political climate in place when Dunham's show,  , debuted in 2012, to largely positive reviews. This was the year House Republicans refused to let Sandra Fluke testify about birth control and when the White House fought a prolonged political war to keep contraceptives covered under  . This opened larger fights about women's reproductive health and sexuality — often dubbed in left-leaning circles the "war on women" — that has continued. Dunham became an avatar for both sides of these debates. Supporters saw her as a champion for the need to address and acknowledge sexuality. Critics on the right saw her and the character she was portraying as irresponsible, a symptom of a culture run amok. This really crystallized in October 2012, when she Conservatives did not like the jokes, which to them represent what makes Dunham a corrosive cultural force. The fact that she made them in support of Obama's reelection seemed to drive home their suspicions that this was all part of a larger political agenda to redefine sexuality and gender for the worse. Columnist Ben Shapiro wrote that Dunham " " in the ad. Erick Erickson  . Kevin Eder said the ad made women looks like " ." And Nathaniel Botwinick at   called it "cringeworthy." That backlash was, and remains, symptomatic of the way that Dunham is often seen on the right as the representation of larger, widely reviled social and political trends. At the same time, Dunham has become a lightning rod in a highly contentious debate on the feminist left about  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 