The Walking Dead's been popular for years. Now it's also good.
Four episodes into its fifth season,   has never been better. On the one hand, this isn't particularly surprising. The series has gotten a little bit better with every season it's been on the air. In its earliest days, it occasionally seemed as if the series were on the air simply because all involved thought it might be kind of crazy to do a TV show about the zombie apocalypse. ( ;  .) The actual difficult work of turning this into a recognizable TV show was left to later showrunners and seasons. It took a while, but the show's fourth season finally managed to turn most members of the ensemble into actual characters. That has given season five the velocity it needed to attain liftoff. (You can  .) But it's still a little  . At its best,   has only ever been passably entertaining. Now, however, it's actually on the verge of becoming really, really good on a consistent basis, and the season's third hour — a grisly affair that featured our heroes dealing out some frontier justice — might be the show's finest episode ever. As  , it's not unprecedented for a series to have its best season in its fifth year, but it's definitely strange for a show to make this big of a leap this late in its run. (Also on board the "wait, is this show   now?" train is  .) But here we are.   is, week in and week out, an entertaining, satisfying viewing experience. How did we get here? Here are a handful of theories.   
 The show's new focus on character has made even Beth (Emily Kinney) interesting to watch. (AMC) For too much of the show's first two seasons,   seemed to be populated by a bunch of half-baked archetypes, led by the halfest-baked archetype of them all — Rick Grimes, small-town sheriff turned post-apocalyptic leader because everybody liked how he looked in a police uniform. Though Andrew Lincoln has been occasionally very good in the role, the show has never known what to do with Rick, and that hasn't really changed in season five. (That said, this year is definitely doing a better job of tapping into his savage, unchecked, brutal side.) What   different, however, is that spending the back half of season four telling various short stories and vignettes about the show's sprawling cast has finally managed to turn many of those archetypes into actual characters. Now, when the show puts characters in peril — or even kills them off — you actually give a damn, instead of rolling your eyes and waiting for the zombies to attack again. I've already  , but the show has managed to turn plaintive, whiny teenager Beth (Emily Kinney) into a character worth caring about, as evidenced by this season's fourth episode, which was dedicated entirely to her ordeal after becoming separated from the rest of the group. But those fourth season storytelling experiments have been helpful to the show in other ways as well, because ... One of the big problems with the show throughout its run has been the way that it boils down to the same thing over and over — the characters find somewhere they think will be safe, only to come into conflict with some other group of survivors. Eden is destroyed, everybody sets off into the wilderness, and the show endlessly resets itself. Rinse. Repeat. And, to be sure, the show still mostly conforms to that basic story structure. But what showrunner Scott Gimple and his writers have done is mess with the   of that story. The season's third episode would have been a season finale in prior years. Now, we know how the show operates so well that it can dispense with the buildup and just get to the climax. And that means when the next episode is an entirely disconnected story about what Beth's been up to all this time, it doesn't feel frustrating, because we're not being taken away from the main story. The main story, in fact,  . Turning into a loose anthology drama in the midst of the zombie apocalypse probably wasn't always the plan for this show, but it's ended up suiting the series well. It's also created an environment where ...   
 Even Rick (Andrew Lincoln) has been weighed down by the season's higher stakes. (AMC)  has always been about how the characters preserve their humanity in the face of the end of the world, but it's rarely felt as much like they're in danger of actually   that humanity as it does in this batch of episodes. The idea of giving up something primal just to be able to survive has been reflected in ways both big and small throughout every storyline on the show, and every character has been tested by that idea time and again. Having that sort of unified focus is incredibly satisfying, and even more satisfying has been the way that the show is subtly underlining the idea that the characters who hang on to their humanity the most are the ones who tend to end up dead. And these ideas are only heightened by the fact that ... Instead of just trying to turn some piece of land into a safe haven as in seasons past, this season of   has keyed in to another idea entirely — saving the world. As Adams points out in his review, having the characters decide whether to escort a man claiming to be a scientist who can stop the apocalypse to Washington, DC, has provided the storytelling with another shot in the arm. In all likelihood, this guy isn't telling the truth. The show isn't going to suddenly start to be about something   than zombies overrunning the world. But by giving the characters a larger purpose than mere survival, the series has given itself something more tangible than a vaguely looming confrontation to push toward.   
 The zombie attacks have always been good, but this season, they're even better. (AMC)  has always given good zombie attacks, but season five has given us even better zombie attacks. From the characters making their way through a flooded basement filled with water-logged monsters to Beth and a friend descending through a barely lit elevator shaft with zombie arms grasping for them, the zombie stuff has been dead-on all season, and creative in ways that are surprising. It should have run out of ideas for zombie attacks long ago, but somehow, season five has been revitalized in this arena as well. It's entirely possible for this show to completely fall apart at any time. It's once again splitting up the ensemble for reasons that seem to have less to do with the actual story and more with keeping things from sprawling too much, and there are so many balls in the air at this point that it's bound to drop one or two of them. But  is one of TV's most popular shows. It could be resting on its laurels and simply giving fans bigger and gorier zombie attacks with every new episode. [if gte mso 9]><xml> 0   0   1   1047   5973   Vox Media   49   14   7006   14.0 </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 9]><xml> Normal   0               false   false   false      EN-US   JA   X-NONE </xml><![endif] [if gte mso 9]><xml> </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 10]>
<style>
 /* Style Definitions */
table.MsoNormalTable
	{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0in;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}
</style>
<![endif] Instead, it's reinvesting in the show's characters, deepening its themes, and twisting its usual formulas.   doesn't just seem revitalized — it seems hungry. And that's made it feel like a brand new, much better show. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 