Celebrate the weekend with this playlist of sunny grooves
Stay inside away from the summer heat this weekend, and listen to some warm, summer-y songs. Celebrate your weekend with this playlist of a few new songs, a few old songs, and a few songs in-between. Relax. It's still summer. For now. All of these songs are up-beat, rock-and-roll Americana. They all feel warm like the late summer weather. by Albert Hammond, Jr. , the debut album for Albert Hammond, Jr., is full of gems. Hammond, Jr., was the guitarist for The Strokes before launching his own solo career, and "Hard to Live" is the perfect intro track for this mix of up-beat Americana. by Intergalactic Lovers The Intergalactic Lovers have always sounded like a band that would in the background of an indie flick about teenage love, and "Fade Away" exemplifies that. It has a steady beat, and Lara Chedraoui's voice is soothing and captivating. by Houndmouth Here's an up-beat song about self-doubt. That could sound counter-intuitive until you catch yourself singing aloud, sunnily, "I'm going down where nobody knows me."  by Saskwatch This band has everything: trumpets, a six-piece backing band, and a lead female singer with a voice filled with soul and heartache. by Ryan Adams Ryan Adams took a break for a few years to produce (see:  ). But "Gimme Something Good," his new single, has a great guitar riff melding with Adams's signature, blues-inspired voice.  by Lake Street Dive Lake Street Drive sits at the intersection of indie, jazz, and soul. Front-woman Rachel Price sings a beautiful story of learning to be alone in a world full of coupling atop a lovely piano composition.  by Pete Yorn Not even Scarlett Johansson's inclusion on this Pete Yorn trak can diminish just how beautifully upbeat it is. by Ben Kweller Ben Kweller used to be a member of now-defunct band Radish before venturing off on his own to record soulful rock and roll. This has notes of old Tom Petty and solid Americana rock. by Jack White Jack White is one of the busiest musicians recording right now and one of the most talented. This single from   showcases his technical skill on guitar and is incredibly cachy. Written by Rudy Toombs, "I'm Shakin'" is a song that will stick in your mind for week.  by Vance Joy Vance Joy's new album   will release on September 5, but he released "Mess Is Mine" early. You may have heard his earlier single "Riptide," which went five times platinum in Australia, but "Mess Is Mine" is tighter and a better song all around. This Americana playlist would not be complete without a song by The Wallflowers. "6th Avenue Heartache," the leadoff single from the group's most popular album,  , is a great option.  by Lady Lamb and the Beekeeper Aly Spaltro is a young musician to watch. Her voice has more range than most folk singers, and she manages to harness twang without over-killing it.  by Angus & Julia Stone Angus & Julia Stone, another Australian group, closes out this Americana-inspired mix. The duo has been on the verge of big popularity for a few years, but its self-titled new debut is a bold change in sound for the better. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 