11 things you learn in the first season of your TV show
From You're the Worst creator Stephen Falk   ########  BEGIN SNIPPET  ########   FX's wickedly funny romantic comedy    , and over the course of its first season became one of the best new shows of the year, blessed with both boozy brains and an acrid black heart. The pilot worked because it leaned heavily on romantic comedy tropes but inverted them. The meet-cute became the meet-nasty, and Jimmy and Gretchen, the show's central couple (played brilliantly by Chris Geere and Aya Cash), felt an obvious weight to their connection that was at once exhilarating and terrifying. Leaning on that gave the pilot its strength. But what's been impressive since then is the way that the show has dug in even deeper. In tonight's season finale, the show finally bares completely its bleedingly romantic heart, and there are moments that are downright swoon-worthy. They work, however, because they're built out of the show's general world-weary attitude and realistic understanding of how relationships work. Indeed, with a fall TV season arriving that's positively lousy with romantic comedies that don't seem to understand how human relationships work, it's good to pay heed to some of the things   gets so very right. (And if you're so inclined, click over to my interview with creator and showrunner Stephen Falk to find out things he learned while making the first season.) Jimmy and Gretchen are just about perfect for each other. They laugh at each other's sick jokes, they both have a latent distrust of the rest of humanity, and they can't quite seem to get their lives going. Together, they're somehow better than they are apart, and even though their relationship starts as a casual fling, it becomes something real and serious far more quickly than either of them are prepared for. In a lot of romantic comedies, that would be where the story ends — two people who are perfect for each other finally realizing it and falling into each other's arms. But on  , that realization is the catalyst for things to blow up in Jimmy's and Gretchen's faces. The two of them   perfect for each other, but they're also ... well, look at the title of the show. Love is a wonderful thing, and finding someone who feels about you the way you do about them is even better. But it's also terrifying, because it means opening yourself up to someone who could very easily tear your heart out of your chest and stomp all over it.   succeeds because it understands how scary it is to finally give in to that feeling. As Falk explains in his interview with me, he's tired of stories about man-children who find themselves married to thoroughly patient women who take care of everything in their lives and become pseudo-mothers to them, a critique  makes particularly vivid  Gretchen isn't some patient mother hen waiting to swoop in and take care of her new boyfriend but, rather, a messy, disorganized person herself. The episode in which Jimmy finally visits Gretchen's apartment, only to find it a complete pit (and to be horrified by the notion that she watches TV on her computer, rather than a TV) was a season highlight. But that episode also foregrounded the show's stealth storytelling structure. This is a show about falling in love, sure, but it's also a show about what it means to grow up, to finally accept that you're an adult now and have responsibilities both to yourself and to other people around you. Both Gretchen and Jimmy are depicted as people who attempt to keep their emotions as placid as possible, the better for anything bad to skip off of them like a stone. But that also reduces them to immature people, unable to care about anything all that deeply, much of the time.   understands that adulthood is a slow progression of opening yourself up to the world around you.   Jimmy's fling with Gretchen builds to a point where they're finally ready to call each other boyfriend and girlfriend (in one of the series' most winning moments), but very soon after, a package in the mail brings up memories of his father and sends him emotionally reeling.   very slowly sketches in the deeper emotional lives of both Jimmy and Gretchen — as might happen with a person you were just starting to date — and it's here that the show reveals how hard it can be to realize the person you're falling for has deep hurt and pain, just like you. But it's also indicative of the way that Jimmy's new relationship acts as a kind of gateway for these other emotions, even the unpleasant ones, to bubble up and resurface. It's impossible to only feel the good things and not the bad — just as it's impossible to only spend good moments with a person you love, and not the bad ones. Jimmy and Gretchen meet at the wedding of one of Jimmy's exes, a woman whose ultimate rejection of him turned him into the misanthropic novelist he is when the series begins. (His pain allowed him to write, but it also turned him into an unpleasant person.) The idea of the writer as outside observer, wryly commenting on the things happening around him, is an old idea in our culture, but Falk and his writers eventually puncture this idea with the realization that Jimmy isn't just attached to Gretchen — he's attached to a whole community of friends and acquaintances, right down to the neighbor kid. If  's first season had a flaw, it was that some of these supporting characters could come across as broad types, rather than fully-realized figures in their own right. But by the end of tonight's finale, almost every single one of them — even a cat — is an important figure in their own right. It's an impressive feat of world-building and character construction. Above all,   works because it understands there's still something thrilling about two people admitting they love each other, even if they couch it in as many disavowals and sidebars as they can muster. Jimmy and Gretchen make each other better, somehow, and it's plain to most people who watch them.   can play around like it's treating all of this nonchalantly, but when the two finally admit their feelings, it swoons just as much as we do.  hasn't exactly set the ratings world on fire, but Falk tells me he's "optimistic" for a renewal. Here's hoping FX realizes what a gem it has in this show and gives it another chance.   Stephen Falk first became known to TV fans for his work on two of Jenji Kohan's series —   and  writing episodes for both. But those who get really into following the careers of TV writers might have known him for  , a sitcom he created that was to star Dane Cook. NBC picked that show up and produced four episodes, then declined to finish out its six-episode order or ever air said episodes. Falk wrote a semi-famous, blisteringly funny   about the experience that made the TV fan rounds. But this summer, he returned with his first "created by" credit to make it on the air, FX's brilliant  . And to commemorate the end of the show's first season tonight, Falk talked with us about some of the things he learned over the course of making that first season. What follows is in his words, which have been lightly edited for length and clarity. "Because my  "But now, as the network starts seeing the cuts and as   the audience is finally getting to see them, some of those things that, at   first, were like, 'Is this too totally weird? Or is this actor maybe   playing it a little big, or whatever?' those are the things that   sometimes get the most reaction. Or some joke I wanted to cut. I thought   maybe I should cut back with the dumb joke, or too silly, or whatever. Those   are the things that people seem to really like. "Not that I didn't make a   single mistake in all the episodes — far from it — but I think I learned to   just calm down and trust in my original decisions. Because even some of the   casting decisions were not necessarily exactly what the network wanted. And   in the end, they agreed that they were the right decisions, like casting our   female lead." "But I think what I stuck to was that   we have to trust these side characters have to function as their own human   beings and not just as sounding boards for the main characters, because   that's a trope I hate in romantic comedies. I said, 'Look, I have to give these other characters more screen time and their   own stories.' Even not just Edgar and Lindsay, but Becca, and Vernon,   and Paul. I needed time to make them all full human beings and have their own   little storylines, little arcs. Or Sam, or even the bookstore lady, or the   shop cat. "I wanted these elements to all be there because what I kept saying   was, 'It's world building, you guys. It's world building.' And   the more we actually build an inhabited fleshed-out world where people are   real people and not just plot devices, it's going to only help the Jimmy and   Gretchen storylines feel more impactful and real." "I gave her some notes   that addressed their concerns, and she was phenomenal. So, they were just   normal. They had a slightly different vision in mind. Nothing super specific.   But I knew what a tremendous actress she was, and how she had both sides — the sort of harsher side of Gretchen, but also a deep well of emotion   — and she's very, very vulnerable. And they saw that." "I   think I learned to trust directors more than sometimes I did, because it's a   very strange relationship on TV between writers and directors, and   it's very opposite in film. The writer is in charge [in television], basically, but   it's the director's set, and you have to give them the space to deal with the   actors and do that. But in the end, you can pull them aside and say, 'I   don't like how this is going' or 'I don't like how you're shooting   this. Let's do this differently.' It's a really fraught and weird   relationship, and often, directors who come from features aren't used to that,   and they have a big problem with it. "Like, my pilot director, Jordan Roberts,  came from features. And it took us a little while during the pilot process to   find that balance. But most of it involved me letting go of control. But also, I think it was very helpful for the show to let the   directors really have the set and work with the actors. And I would address   concerns directly to him. But for me not to feel like I had to be running   around doing everything because I'm the only executive producer on the show,   I created it, I wrote seven of the episodes. I have this very control freak   nature, so it was great for me to find these wonderful collaborators and just   let them fly." "And we functioned really well. They're all so   funny. They really deepened a lot of the characters, and brought their   own voices to it. I think the season is way, way better with their   input and their hard work, than if I had just like sat in a room and did it   all myself." "And then, I realized, 'Oh, I've kind of written   a British guy anyway,' because he's very verbal and eloquent. But he   also says a lot of horrible shit, and British guys can just get away with   it. It's completely unfair, but they get the bad teeth thing, so it evens out   in the end. But they can sound charming. Hugh Grant goes on with his floppy   hair after getting a blow job on Sunset, and America immediately forgives   him. It's an unfair advantage, but it was a superpower they have that I   immediately said, 'Oh, I can use this.' "It didn't change,   fundamentally, who he was, but it certainly changed the package he came in,   and then allowed me to write in a very, very specific voice, because Chris   has such a, not only literal voice, but he just has a demeanor that shifted a   little bit. I could write 'wanker' and I could write these Britishisms that   come out of his mouth really well and that are really fun to write." "I think   it's very much a function of the fact that TV writers are generally 25- to   45-year-old men-children, who get to work in their underwear, unless they're   on staff [on a show], and don't necessarily know how to clean up after themselves, and   think it would be fantastic to have a beautiful, patient wife at home who put   up with their constant video-game playing, and Googling of ex-girlfriends. That was a factor in creating this relationship where Gretchen   is just as 'bad,' if not worse, sometimes, and has none of those 'patient shrew' qualities, I would call it. She's allowed to exhibit   the same sort of sexual, and vehicular, and alcoholic tendencies as the guys.   I got that permission, I would say, directly from watching British sitcoms   over the last 20 years." "I think the ideal of love is to find someone who doesn't   judge the bad things in you, the scary, or not so attractive, or   embarrassing, or shameful things you might have done in the past or that you   might do in the present, or even the bad hat you may put on one day, or the   bad haircut you got that should not have judgments from the person you're with,   I think, is sort of beautiful, and free use, free deal. And then, what I   realized, I find that moment to be the most romantic moment in the show. And   I consider the show very romantic. The look on her face of, 'Oh, this   guy gives me permission to be me, warts and all.' I think that is   beautiful." "We   really crafted the stories to make very specific acts. The pilot's a prologue. Two, three, four is the first act. Five, six, seven is the second. Two,   three, four is them having fun, them getting to know each other and   tip-toeing, and bumping into the rules of what it is to date this other   person. Five, six, seven starts with the Sunday Fun Day episode, and that's   the more visceral, 'Okay, we're going to kind of have fun.' And   it's a little more fun, and it sings a little more. And then, eight, nine, 10, again, a different director, are   sort of where that kind of fun comes to end a little bit and it's the more   emotional [story], where they realize they've gotten way closer and way more entangled   in each other's lives than they need to, and dealing with the fallout   of that. "I think, with the writers' help, I really learned to see a season as   a whole, rather than just individual pieces, because indeed, this isn't a   situation comedy in the way that you just drop these funny characters into a   situation and watch what wacky stuff happens. We don't have a bar where they're all hanging out and, 'Look who walked in,' and watch them all have   to deal with the fallout of that. We ironically got a lot of lessons from   of really how to structure. I think that show is sort of a   master class in structure. And so, while the shows couldn't be more different, I   think we kept that in mind. "Also, I really learned to trust human behavior   and stay focused on what someone would actually do — even someone who's   weird, and odd, and narcissistic, or a slut, or whatever. If you stay   true to the honesty of human behavior, I think you end up having to search a   little bit more for comedy, but what comes out, I think, is a lot funnier and   resonates as funnier because it rings more true. I learn lessons every day in   the writer's room, every day on set, every day in the editing room, and   indeed, now that I'm done with that process, every day watching people react   to the show and find the show, which really had a small marketing budget and   no stars and really not a lot of word of mouth at the beginning. To   watch an audience embrace that has been fascinating." "One thing that   struck me this morning about that is having just worked on the Netflix show,    , I think this is better than dumping a show all at   one time. Specifically, for the reason that, when it's once a week, you get   to watch the audience find it. And it gives, in a very, very real-time way   that I think happens a lot differently with, like,   season one, where you   dump them all. You don't get the pleasure of everyone watching the same   episode at once, which you don't get exactly the way you did 20 years ago   before DVRs, but it's just a lot more fun. I think it actually has helped   the show get strong word of mouth, and get the recent attention that it   has in a very different way."   ########  END SNIPPET  ########   