Moms can be sexy too. Stop slut-shaming Kim Kardashian
Kim Kardashian West,  and reality television show star, stirs up controversy with everything she does. Tuesday night, she stirred up buzz and critique over her photo shoot for the cover of Paper magazine. She appears inside of a trash bag with her ass on prominent display.   
 The cover of Paper Magazine   
 Rivera's comment has not been confirmed by her camp, and Kardashian has not responded. But the message behind this comment is one women hear over and over again. Women are told  ,  after they give birth, and  . Once a woman becomes a mother, her body becomes subject to public discussion.  is disgusting. She is a mother now. Her first thought should be how is what I am about to do going to affect my child 
 
 One of these many messages thrown at new mothers is that they are no longer allowed to be sexual (in public) because they are a mom.  Kim Kardashian West isn't alone in receiving these critiques. Beyoncé heard similar comments when she created the visual album  because her videos were too sexy.  She was also slammed for her Grammy performance. How come Beyonce (a mother) can dress like a slut and we think the highest of her, but any other artist does it and they're vilified?  for this issue of Paper were shot by Jean-Paul Goude, a French photographer known for his high-end advertising work. There is also  in which Kim balances a champagne glass on her ass, which Kim joked about: And they say I didn't have a talent...try balancing a champagne glass on your ass LOL   Since the beginning of her career as a famous person, Kim Kardashian's image has been wrapped up in her sexuality. From   to her  , Kim has marketed, made money, and been heavily critiqued for displaying her body. But now that she's a mother, that too can be used as a weapon against her.   
 Kim, Kanye and North West pose in Paris (Bertrand Rindoff Petroff/Getty) When women become mothers, the expectation for them to curb their sexuality increases dramatically.  If women are expected to be everything, women who are also mothers are expected to be even more. "Motherhood is no longer viewed as simply a relationship with your children, a role you play at home and at school, or even a hallowed institution," Heather Havrilesky wrote in an  . "Motherhood has been elevated — or perhaps demoted — to the realm of lifestyle, an all-encompassing identity with demands and expectations that eclipse everything else in a woman's life." Unlike fatherhood, motherhood becomes a woman's primary identity, and yet another way for society to police her behavior. Channing Tatum recently became a father, and his male-stripper movie   has a sequel planned for 2015. No one will tell him that he can't strip naked because "he's a father." These criticisms use Kim Kardashian West's role as a mother as an excuse to shame her for posing provocatively.  If she wants to flaunt her body, that's no less her decision because she has a daughter. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 