How to Get Away with Murder has the hottest gay sex on television. That's progress.
Pulitzer Prize-winning author Junot Diaz was speaking to a class of community college students in New Jersey  when he unleashed a searing observation about representation and being a non-white person in America. "If you want to make a human being into a monster, deny them, at the cultural level, any reflection of themselves," he told the class, telling them his experience of growing up and never seeing people like himself in the reflection that is television, literature, or movies. It's not that television hasn't tried to be more inclusive. But television history is littered with failed attempts at "diversity," resulting in token characters who end up being the only minority (racial, gender, sexual) in the room, and, more often than not, too perfect or too earnest to be real human beings.  A product of Shonda Rhimes's Shondaland production company and creator Peter Nowalk,   has taken characters — a gay man; a privileged, young, intelligent black woman; a black man on a law school waitlist; an Ivy-League educated Latina — that have usually been dutiful token characters on network shows, cooked them in same gooey soup of amorality belonging to Tony Soprano and Frank Underwood, and shown that they can be as morally confusing and dastardly as the rest of humanity. Turning these would-be saints into sinners is the best part of this fall season's most exciting new show. Viola Davis is the show's star, and her portrayal of central character Annalise Keating, a defense attorney, is incredibly removed from the roles Davis has played in the world of film. Before the show, it was difficult to think of Davis — who crafted her art on stage and at Juilliard — without thinking of her heart-breaking, Oscar-nominated work as the saintly Aibileen Clark in  There's little of that sturdy, quiet virtue in  Instead, Davis is given lines like "Why is your penis on a dead girl's phone?"   
 How to Get Away with Murder (ABC) Keating is a cheater, a schemer, a champion, and a stalwart. She is loyal, brazen, salty, stubborn, egotistical, and vulnerable. She's as virtuous as she is flawed. And each week, the show is structured to have her lecture to her students how to play the field, stack the deck, sell your soul, navigate the godless world of the law, and come out on top. Keating is also an enabler — if not a pusher — in terms of morally gray behavior. Putting aside the overarching plot that involves Keating's students covering up a possible murder, each one has shown their own agency in bending or even breaking the rules. And in so doing, the show has allowed for them to break out of token character status as well. Laurel Castillo (Karla Souza) started off as the earnest martyr trying to shield a fellow student from Keating's wrath. Now, she's is tampering with juries and cheating on her goody-goody Legal Aid boyfriend. Wesley Gibbons (Alfred Enoch) is sneaking into police stations and sleeping with a client. And Michaela Pratt (Aja Naomi King), the show's perfect princess, has, in the course of a young semester, learned how to lie to obtain a witness's medical records and shown flashes of casual homophobia. Like Davis's Keating, there hasn't been a character quite like Walsh on network television. Throughout pop culture, there's been a trend of glossing over gay men's sexual lives. Like sisters in Victorian novels, gay men are often introduced and then rushed into dreams of earnest long-term loves (see:  ) or marriages (see: Kevin Keller of  ;  ). If that's not the case, they often start out already married (see:  ). Politically, framing gay life around the idea of  has helped pave the way for   victories in  . And there's no way to quantify the big impact these depictions have had in making LGBT life relatable and respected. But these portrayals are still safe, easily digestible, and upright. They tend to show sex only in the context of romance or marriage, and they're rarely overtly sexual.   
 One of Connor's sex scenes (ABC; GIF by  ) Connor breaks this bedrock. For the most part, he's allowed to have sweaty, unctuous, sex (sometimes in courthouse restrooms) without the hint of a date. He uses it to get ahead, and he isn't (again, for the most part) punished when he does. The sex he's having is as stylized and eroticized as everyone else's romps. And that executive producer   doesn't differentiate a "gay" sex scene from any other one makes it even more refreshing. That might be changing. In recent episodes, the show has started to show Connor developing a tender torch for a man named Oliver. There were flowers and puppy dog eyes in last week's episode, as well as a heavy sense that Connor's conscience and a yearning for monogamy could be making an appearance in future episodes. Here's hoping it doesn't come to dominate his character. That would be a shame. The characters on  can get away with devious behavior partly because they are protected by their desire to be lawyers, a tribe of people that television has designated to have free passes on morality. This type of behavior might come across differently if, say, this were a show about teachers. But   the characters are able to get away with this sort of thing is ultimately less interesting than the fact that they're getting away with it at all. The territory of lying, cheating, and getting laid has long been the stomping grounds for television's "difficult men" — the Don Drapers, Tony Sopranos, Walter Whites, Nate Fishers, and Dexter Morgans of the medium.  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 