From warp drives to holodecks: 7 Star Trek technologies scientists are working on
Science fiction is well known for imagining future technology before it gets here. And this is particularly true for  . Some of the gadgets portrayed on   have since become a reality, including wireless communications and portable flat-screen computers (iPads, essentially). Other technology from the show has yet to happen. But that doesn't mean scientists aren't trying. In recent decades, researchers have been making surprising gains on all sorts of  -esque tech. They've developed invisibility cloaking and teleportation — albeit only at very tiny scales so far. They've hooked up people's brains to create actual telepathic experiences. They've been able to give the blind some low-resolution bionic sight. And a few scientists are even doing experiments to achieve the long-shot dream of traveling faster than the speed of light. Here's a look at how scientists are actively working on the technology of  Some of these technologies are far off and may never come to pass. But others, like 3-D printers and bionic eyes, are remarkably close:   
   Captain Kirk points to a distortion from a cloaked ship (   These projects have generally involved creating sophisticated materials that can reroute light in various ways to hide objects. These materials can conceal microscopic objects from non-visible light such as microwaves. Hiding larger objects (like a human or a ship) from smaller-wavelength light, aka visible light, is much trickier. But there have been some advances here, too. Researchers have created materials that should   be able to hide things from visible light. And in June of 2014, researchers   a technique to   relatively large objects — and even their shadows — as long as the object was in murky water. And several cloaking attempts with life-size objects have used a technique called "active camouflage" by rigging up cameras. For example, in 2012 Mercedes-Benz released this  , which combined a camera and a ton of LEDs to basically turn a car into a giant video screen that showed images of what was on the car's other side, making it somewhat seem to disappear (at least from afar). Academic researchers have demonstrated similar   using people's clothing.   
         Edible confections made in the 3D Systems ChefJet Pro 3D food printer. (Robyn Beck/AFP/Getty Images)   In the world of   a   is a device that can creates objects on demand and is most often used for food.  The most common medium for 3-D printers is still plastic, which the printers squeeze out layer by layer to create complex, three-dimensional objects. However, some companies have made 3-D printers that can make food, too. Researchers have been exploring 3-D printing that takes food paste and creates chocolates, pizzas, veggie nuggets, and even ravioli,   to Venessa Wong, over at  . And both   and the   have explored 3-D printing food to deliver nutritious meals far away from home. The catch? You still need to put food into this machine to get food out of it, rather than creating it atom by atom like a   replicator does. And the process can also be quite slow. So there's still work to be done on this one. The   on   is essentially the ultimate virtual-reality room. Everything there looks and feels perfectly real. (So real, in fact, that you could risk being killed by a holodeck person if you turn the safety settings off.) Several projects that exist today make the holodeck not all that far-fetched. For example, the   headset gives gamers the visual experience of being surrounded by a video game, no matter where they look.  But how do you get the experience of being able to walk around your virtual reality without bumping into actual-reality walls? One current method is with an omnidirectional treadmill, such as the experimental  , which lets you endlessly ramble in any direction you choose.   Captain Kirk and colleagues using the transporter. (CBS Photo Archive/Getty Images)   Perhaps the most iconic piece of   technology is the  . That's the "Beam me up, Scotty" device that teleports people from one place to another nearly instantaneously. Some signs that this might be possible someday are coming from  . At terrifically small scales, some weird physics emerges. One thing that happens is that two particles can become entangled such that the state of one instantaneously affects the state of another — even if they're very, very far apart.  One big problem then comes from scaling this up to teleport entire human bodies. And    
   The USS Enterprise from  . So fast the stars look like streaks. (CBS via Getty Images)   The spaceships of   use   for propulsion, which allows them to warp the fabric of space-time to travel faster than the speed of light — and far, far across the galaxy. This concept is a direct violation of Einstein's  , which states that nothing can travel faster than the speed of light, and has thus remained purely in the realm of science fiction for decades. But in 1994, physicist   published a paper that ran the numbers and came up with a possible  . He proposed that by contracting space in front of your craft and expanding it behind you, you could theoretically create a bubble of space-time that you could surf faster than light. The only hitch was that it would require massive amounts of a theoretically-predicted-but-yet-to-be-directly-observed thing called negative energy. And in the fall of 2012, NASA engineer   presented further calculations that by changing the shape of the warp field, the need for negative energy would be drastically reduced into something he described to Popular Science as "plausible." And he's taken the work from calculations to actual experiments. He's been testing the concept on a far smaller scale with a tabletop device involving lasers. That said, White's project definitely has many doubters,   Alcubierre himself. So we really have no idea if this will ever happen.     Second Sight's Argus implant provides some vision for the blind. ( )    character Geordi La Forge was born completely blind but can see perfectly fine thanks to a bionic device called a  , which sends visual information into his brain. This one isn't so far off. In 2013, the FDA   the first bionic eye in real life — which actually does give some sight to the blind. Called the Argus II, it's an eye implant that passes real-time video information into the brain, albeit with very limited resolution and in grayscale. It The Argus definitely doesn't bring people anywhere near 20/20 vision. But it provides enough resolution to let people see the outline of a doorway, the movement of a person, or the lines on a crosswalk. Some have even been able to use it to   letters of the alphabet that are a few centimeters tall.  Other projects are also on the horizon. Some notable ones include research based at the University of Tübingen in Germany that has produced an eye implant that directly senses light. In clinical trials, it has allowed at least one patient to   large letters. And other researchers are working on implants that go into the   rather than the eye.   Waiting to receive a telepathic communication from someone else via this giant magnet. (Grau, C., et al. PLOS ONE 2014)   Spock and other Vulcan people on   have an amazing telepathic ability called  . And today, one-way telepathic ability has already been   using current technology. Two projects published in 2014 have demonstrated limited telepathic exchanges using electrodes (EEG) to read brainwaves and transcranial-magentic stimulation (TMS) to deliver messages to another person's brain. In August 2014, an international group led by Starlab Barcelona researchers in Spain used this kind of setup to very, very slowly have someone send a   to someone else. They called it the "realization of the first human brain-to-brain interface." And then in November of 2014, a team from the University of Washington had two people telepathically play a  . Only one person could see the game, and he telepathically moved the other person's hand on the controller. It seems like science fiction, but it's real. An in-depth overview of recent   experiments A visit to NASA's  , written by Konstantin Kakaes for Popular Science Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 