The 8 biggest names in pop music you've never heard
A pop star is the voice of a number-one single, but they're rarely the only brain behind a smash hit.  A hit song is made in the studio. The producers create the chord progressions, master the riffs, and add in the beats and instrumental sounds.  A writer, who is often able to sing,  works on the lyrics on top of the sounds already created by the producers. The group then workshops the words into the classic pop song structure (verse, pre-chorus, chorus, bridge) before sending the demo recording around to artists they think the song would work for. Jeff Bhasker, in scarf, with the band Fun. at the 55th Grammys. Photo by Jeff Kravitz  is a songwriter, keyboardist, and producer. That's him in the scarf on the left. Bhasker moved to Los Angeles in 2005 and ended up in a  . Through LA artist circles, Bhasker became friends with Kanye West, and ended up working as substitute keyboardist and later musical director for Kanye's  . In just a few years, Bhasker emerged from a cover band member in LA dive bars to producing Alicia Keys' " ." Bhasker's songs, more than other major producers, dominate the popular slow jam. Think Beyoncé's "I Care," Taylor Swift's "The Lucky One", and Fun.'s "We Are Young." Bhasker brings the rhythm and groove of hip-hop into the catchy riffs of pop. As he told ,  Bhasker won the Grammy Award for best Rap Song in 2012 for his work on "Run This Town" by Jay-Z and featuring Rihanna and Kanye West. Katy Perry is one of the many pop sensations built by these producers.  Photo courtesy of NBC When it comes to pop princesses, Max Martin, Dr. Luke, and Benny Blanco have staked their claim to the throne. They work with the same artists, sometimes even together, and are known for creating songs that wedge themselves into your subconscious on repeat so that you wake up singing them in your head for weeks. I'm looking at you, " ." These three men have each taken their turn in the spotlight of pop-princess hits, making them a production legacy that spans decades. Martin was  pop music producer of the early 2000s. He sealed his spot among the Top Forty gods with hits like The Backstreet Boys' "I Want it That Way" and Britney Spears' "...Oops I did it again."   Martin was the brain behind Taylor Swift's   with songs like "We are Never Ever Getting Back Together" and "22." Martin's ability to pick out a pop single and spread it like wildfire is unmatched except maybe by his protégé, Dr. Luke. Martin won the 2014 Grammy for Best Producer for his work on Taylor Swift's  . Dr. Luke spent 10 years as a   guitarist before he was pulled to fame by Max Martin for Kelly Clarkson's 2004 hit "Since U Been Gone." Dr. Luke continued his success with Max Martin by quickly co-writing and producing Avril Lavigne's "Girlfriend," and Katy Perry's "I Kissed a Girl."  In October 2013, Dr. Luke had two number 1 songs on back-to-back weeks: Katy Perry's "Roar" and Miley Cyrus' "Wrecking Ball." Dr. Luke is known for working with both live instruments and pre-recorded samples. Though the album sales industry has collapsed around him, Dr. Luke has continued to churn out hits.  It is a very careful balance, he told  ,  of "the right artist with the right song at the right time." Benny Blanco is the next in line for the pop-prince crown. Still a few years from 30, Blanco has already produced dozens of major hits. "I just want to sound different than everyone else," he said. "I don't care if it sounds bad. I just want people to be like, ‘Yo, that dude Benny was different.' Even if it sounds awful, at least they can't say, ‘Oh well, I've heard that before.'" Blanco told the  Blanco still creates his hits with real instruments like Dr. Luke, and has already built a resumé of catchy pop songs both on his own and co-produced. Blanco is the man behind hits like Maroon 5's "Moves Like Jagger" and "Payphone," Rihanna's "Diamonds," and Ke$ha's "Blow." Ryan Tedder with the Grammy for Adele's album '21.' Photo by Frederic J. Brown. Ryan Tedder is the front man of rock group OneRepublic, but he's also a producer.  His sound, as described to  , is a mix of "American gospel rock meets anything British." The artists he works with are known for just that. Adele, Kelly Clarkson, Jennifer Hudson, Beyonce, Whitney Houston, and Justin Timberlake all turn to Ryan Tedder when they want a hit with a little bit of soul. Tedder might be one of the most profitable producers in the game.   that he made $2.5 million dollars in 2013 alone off of hits like Adele's "Rumour Has It" and Beyoncé's "XO." Ester Dean has written many of Rihanna's #1 hits. Photo by Ian Gavan. Ester Dean isn't a producer; she's the god of addicting catchy lyrics. Dean is a top writer in the industry who often provides the voice for the demos sent to artists, but she also creates the lyrics that brand a song as #1. It was Dean who wrote "Come, on rude boy boy, can you get it up? Come on rude boy, boy is you big enough" for Rihanna's "Rude Boy" and " Come on!" for "S&M." "I go into the booth and I scream and I sing and I yell, and sometimes it's words but most time it's not" Dean told , "And I just see when I get this little chill... and then I'm like 'Yeah, that's the hook.'" Dean also released her own single "Drop it Low" in 2009, but she's much better known for writing lyrics for Christina Aguilera, Kelly Clarkson, Ciara, Britney Spears, Rihanna, and Beyoncé. Ne-yo performed Stargate's first major hit "So Sick." Photo by Ragnar Singsass. Stargate is a Norwegian production company that creates about 80 demos each year. Twenty-five end up on records. Made up of Tor Hermansen and Mikkel Eriksen, Stargate enjoyed some moderate success in the late 90s before hitting a rut. Unsatisfied, they picked up their studios, moved them to New York, and ended up producing Ne-Yo's "So Sick" in 2005. It reached number one on the Billboard charts worldwide. "I got hooked on American culture from movies," Eriksen told  , and Stargate's style certainly reflects that.  While Max Martin and the Pop-princes were developing the bubble-gum pop of Britney Spears, Stargate followed the roots of 1980s R&B. Think Prince circa "Purple Rain." Or just listen to "A Place With No Name," Stargate's contribution to Michael Jackson's new posthumous album  Stargate carried these R&B grooves into their new music as well. Just listen to their 2006 production of Beyoncé's "Irreplaceable." Selena Gomez mentions The Cataracs in her song "Slow Down." Photo by Kevin Winter. The Cataracs are the new kids on the block. Originally the duo was composed of Niles "Cyranizzy" Hollowell-Dhar and David "Campa" Benjamin Singer-Vine. After a couple of hits as musicians and being featured on  , The Cataracs shifted gears to become producers. They discovered  , and soon after met Top 40 success by producing "Like a G6" by Far East Movement. In 2012, David  , leaving just Niles to carry The Cataracs. Since then though, the small indie-pop production company has worked with several industry titans from Robin Thicke to Enrique Iglesias. On Beyoncé's new album  The Cataracts produced "Partition. " At the 2:43 mark of Selena Gomez's song "Slow Down," a voice says "It's, it's, it's the Cataracts," adding the new generation's stamp of approval. The Cataracs may be the production company to watch. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 