A male TV anchor wore the same suit for 365 days. Nobody noticed.
Karl Stefanovic, an Australian morning show host, wore the exact same knock-off Burberry suit for an entire year and no one noticed. In the video showing his year in the suit, his  cohost Lisa Wilkinson's wardrobe changes dramatically. She only repeats a couple of outfits over the 365 days, and her apparel choices range from bright reds to subtle black dresses. Stefanovic told   that he did this experiment to call out the unfair emphasis placed on women's appearances.  First impressions matter. Empirical evidence suggests that people who are more beautiful are more likely to be hired and more likely to be paid more, according to  . This study found that how a person dressed for an interview had a consistent influence on interviewers' perceptions of employability." This wasn't solely based on natural beauty, though.   appropriate dress had a larger impact on interviewers than genetic advantages. A  published in the International Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management displays some of the subtle ways that clothing impacts our perception of both men and women. For this study, 300 adults (both men and women) were shown images of a man and a woman for just three seconds before being asked to make snap judgements about them. In some of the photos, the man wore a tailored suit that fit him very well, and in others the man wore an off-the rack suit. The suits were controlled for color and fabric, and the faces of the models were pixellated so that genetic beauty had no impact on the viewers initial impact. What the research revealed was that people viewed the man in the better suit more favorably as a person, not only for the clothing he wore. People perceived him as more confident, successful, flexible, and higher-earning in the tailored suit than in the other suit.  as the tailored-suit scenario, the researchers investigated how large of a role appearance played on how competently people viewed a woman. The researchers tested this with 129 female participants who rated images of faceless female models on six competence based dimensions: intelligence, confidence, trustworthiness, responsibility, authority, and organization. Consistently,   the more conservatively dressed women higher on every dimension, particularly for women they were told held management roles. In her article  Seton Hall University Associate Professor of Law   identifies work culture as a source of discrimination and suggests that many of the problems associated with appearance-based policies stem from cultural and structural dimensions of the workplace. Because the standards of the dominant group (white, heterosexual men) determine the standards of appearance, Green writes, appearance culture puts women and people of color at a disadvantage. Ritu Mahajan wrote an article   for the Asian American Law Journal that dissects the effect these disproportionately high standards have on women in the workplace: Appearance regulations maintain the sexual subordination of women by taking advantage of and repressing expressions of female sexuality; these regulations also punish deviance from male expectations regarding appropriate female behavior. Through such regulations, employers capitalize on women's sexuality in order to attract customers on the one hand, and restrict female dress choices on the other. Not only do appearance standards restrict female dress choices; they also cause women to be more harshly criticized than men for how their hair looks instead of how good or bad they are at their jobs. Stefanovic's prank may be funny, but it also does a damn good job of showing just how heavily society criticizes women. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 