Katherine Heigl's terrible new show State of Affairs, gif-splained
, NBC's new Heigl is a really excellent romantic comedy actress. In movies like   her characters are  , even if they aren't wholly likable. In  , though, she's playing a part outside of her comfort zone, and she doesn't do it very well The role should make   look strong, capable, and kind of badass, but instead she looks like a rom-com actress who is trying to be all of those things. She flounders through the role, and spends most of her time looking like a less capable version of Olivia Pope. Here are nine moments where the show fumbles its story, and  s character becomes completely unbelievable:   
 (NBC) 's method of dealing with her PTSD is going out every night and drinking. Her drunk behavior is grating, because it's so overblown for a character that is otherwise supposed to be put together.   
 (NBC)   (NBC) Tucker recently watched her fiancé die in Kabul, but the way Heigl portrays that hurt is too obvious. An ex-field operative would certainly be better at bottling her emotions, especially in front of her subordinates.   
 (NBC) Here, Heigl is supposed to be puzzled and a little unhappy, and we see that on the screen, but we don't feel it.   
 (NBC) Just watch Heigl try to keep her balance on this moving truck. Tell me she looks like a field operative.   
 (NBC) In every television show ever (and probably in real life) characters shake the president's hand because they are  . Not Heigl. She just plops herself on the couch happily.   
 (NBC)   
 (NBC) One of the looming mysteries of   is how, exactly, Tucker's fiancé died. When she receives anonymous texts from someone who appears to know the circumstances surrounding his death, she doesn't act like someone with government secrets and a system in place to protect her. She freaks out like a civilian.   
 (NBC) Tucker's house is spotless and beautiful. She is a bossy in control lady with hidden guns. Why on earth would she drop her coat on the counter and flip her shoes on the floor? She wouldn't.  This is the biggest problem withTucker: she doesn't seem like a full character because she's so inconsistent. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 