How Bryan Singer brought the X-Men franchise back to life
    Brett Ratner single-handedly ruined the X-Men franchise with  The powers at Fox/Marvel fed two movies and four years of deft and nuanced story-telling to Ratner, the cinematic equivalent of a wood chipper. He shredded the franchise into a gory mash of stringy plots, curdled characters, and left the X-Men fan base marinating in resentment. Add to that, Marvel's push for   With successful movies like  ,  , and all those  flicks at its back, Marvel released   — the first movie to bring six iconic heroes together. Bruised and bloodied from Ratner's reign, and Marvel's unbridled success, it seemed like the X-Men might be better off with the Marvel Studios team.    stopped a bit of the bleeding. But in order to restore faith in the franchise, prove   wasn't a fluke and, at the same time, right Ratner's wrongs, Fox turned to Bryan Singer. And it was the right choice, because there is no director out there who has figured out the way to translate the  pages of comic books into motion pictures the way Singer has. The X-Men and villains in the X-Men franchise are a bit more complicated than your typical superhero. Take the Avengers for example: all of them are pretty great at fighting. Some, like Hulk, hit harder and some, like Hawkeye, are good with certain weapons. This is pretty easy to translate into a movie scene — make a bigger sound when Hulk hits something or have Hawkeye never miss. What makes the X-Men a bit more complicated is that their powers are a bit more robust than super strength. Yes, some of their powers (e.g. Cyclops, Wolverine) are pretty explicit in that a character needs to shoot beams from his eyes or have metal claws come out of his skin. But, there are also some characters who have telepathy, teleportation, shape-shifting, and mind control as their gifts. Translating that in a way that the audience can understand is hard (ask Ratner). Singer is really good at this, and has a way of translating superpowers onto the screen without hefty explanations. And Singer trusts the audience. There's a small scene from that begins with Professor X standing — a clue that he's under the control of Jason, a mutant with the power of illusion:   
 (Fox/Marvel)   
 (Marvel)   
 (Fox/Marvel) The most-talked about scene in   … is Quicksilver's jailbreak scene (which we unfortunately don't have a  full clip of yet). Quicksilver's power is simple — he is gifted with super speed. Running fast would be the easy way out. Singer achieved something more brilliant by not taking the easy way, but by throwing everyone not named Quicksilver into slow motion: The other impressive feat Singer accomplished is bringing the mutant Blink into the movies. Blink has the power to transport objects and people through the use of little pink energy daggers. In this panel, from the X-Men's "Necrosha" story arc, she teleports Angel's wings away in a pink flash:   
 (Marvel) Singer tinkered with the visuals of her powers a bit and, instead, made Blink's daggers rip holes into space and time (in the comics she has this ability, but it works a bit different). Visually, there's more of a payoff in Singer's treatment:   
 (Fox/Marvel) Granted, there's a lot more to   that helped it right a lot of Ratner's wrongs (e.g. Jennifer Lawrence turning in a marvelous Mystique; the chemistry between Michael Fassbender and James McEvoy; the  -esque costumes)—these epic fight scenes only make up a short portion of the movie. But when you're paying for a superhero-driven summer blockbuster you want fantastic super powers. And Fox picked the best man to give us that. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 