2014 was the year Lana Del Rey became a great pop artist. Here's why.
Singer Lana Del Rey, whose new album  was one of the best of the year,  She seems to be both trying too hard and not trying hard enough," as Slant's Paul Rice  , "stoking questions about whether she even means any of what she's singing." But ultimately the controversy that surrounds Lana Del Rey made her into a star, and it didn't stop people from listening to her new album. Lana Del Rey performs at Amoeba Music Hollywood. Kevin Winter/Getty  was born in   as  Here's a video of Lizzy Grant performing: In this video, she's self conscious and awkward. She hangs on to the microphone like a life raft, and her voice is muted as she sways aimlessly from side to side. Grant must have known, on some level, that what she was doing wasn't working.  She had released her debut-full length album titled  (note the different spelling) on iTunes with 5 points, but it received little attention or praise. She hired a new manager, Ben Mawson, and set off to reinvent herself. To become a self-made pop-princess sensation, she had to seem self-made, and Lizzy Grant had to die to make room for Lana Del Rey. But she made a major mistake. She   to   pulled the original EP from the market, and swept clean her internet presence. This "clean slate" came back to haunt Del Rey when members of the music community began to question her authenticity.   With the YouTube release of her song "Video Games" in June 2011, Del Rey took off: Six months later, her second studio album   debuted at number 2 on the U.S. Billboard 200.  Since then she has released a short film,  and an EP titled  Her third studio album   was released in June, and as of November 1 has sold more than one million copies.  But none of that came without controversy. When "Video Games" premiered it was labeled as a " " and grew viral among indie-bloggers within a few weeks.  awarded "Video Games" a   label. Del Rey She gave an exclusive interview to  in August 2011.  She said that she'd been singing in Brooklyn since she was 17 and "no one in the industry cared at all. I haven't changed a thing since then and yet things seem to be turning around for me. Perhaps the angels decided to shine on me for a little while." But that bliss didn't last for long. As early as September of 2011 — less than a month after  sang her praises — the tides began to turn. Indie-music blog   labelled her the "most controversial broad in indie right now," saying that she carefully planned the hype around "Video Games" and was trying to trick the music world into believing that she was a self-made, American Dream Achieving, Indie-pop princess  Hipster Runoff split her coverage into two distinct camps (#teamlana and #efflana), with critics claiming that she was a poser and just a "failed mainstream artist." By October the critiques had become personal:  Del Rey was criticized for having lip enhancement surgery ( ). Despite the criticism, Lana Del Rey  . In fact, all of this criticism was making Lana Del Rey a figure of public interest. By January 2012, it looked like Lana Del Rey was set to take over the music world. As she neared the release of her "debut" album  her popularity soared.   For most of the performance, Del Rey just swayed back and forth. She was nervous. She looked like the shy, t-shirt-wearing Lizzy Grant she was supposed to have discarded. She looked beautiful but her performance fell flat. Brian Williams, the anchor for  ,  , "Lana Del Rey had one of the worst outings in  history last night," and that she was "the least-experienced musical guest in the show's history." Her only defender was   who did not even see the performance. It's important to remember that at this point, Del Rey still had not put out a full-length feature album.   was well-buried from the public. For her to perform on   was a huge boost for her album before she had even released it. When the album did drop, though, the backlash was swift. Jon Caramanica of   wrote that "The only real option is to wash off that face paint, mess up that hair and try again in a few years. There are so many more names out there for the choosing." Even   who had lauded "Video Games," gave   a 5.5 out of 10 calling it "the equivalent of a faked orgasm—a collection of torch songs with no fire." Lana Del Rey poses in front of an American flag. Jason LeVaris/Getty Lana Del Rey and Taylor Swift. Dave J. Hogan/Getty. But if we look at the timing of Del Rey's controversies, detractors could easily argue they were planned, that her public dust-ups were, like the rest of her persona,  . She gives a miserable   performance, spurring hundreds of headlines the week before the album drops. Then, when she's set to release a new single " ," she adds some controversy to her publicity by wearing a full Native American headdress, an appropriation of another group's culture. "Lana Del Rey may be more in control of her career and her life than most think,"   When Del Rey It's no surprise, then, that the release of  was accompanied by still more Del Rey controversies.  Lana Del Rey performs. Nick Pickles/Getty. But none of this controversy changes the fact that  is a better album than  was, and that people bought it and listen to it.   is more rock-heavy than Del Rey's earlier work and built on a themes of desperation and loss. Even   who demolished her first album, gave  positive review, saying Lana Del Rey is "a pop music original full-stop, and there are not nearly enough of those around." Overall, Metacritic   an average score of 76, or "generally favorable," which is significantly higher than the 61 received. The cult of Lana Del Rey did not just survive the controversy of inauthenticity, it thrived through it.  is on track to sell between 175,000 and 200,000 copies in its first week, which landed her in the #1 spot. Lana Del Rey is not going anywhere soon. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 