Five charts that explain why we didn't go to the movies this summer
That didn't happen this year. Summer — from the first weekend in May to Labor Day — is the season where the movie industry is supposed to make the most money. People want to be inside, in air conditioning, drinking giant beverages, watching things blow up. Though international box office is more important to the industry than ever, this piece only reflects domestic numbers, as an attempt to examine why Americans seemed less interested in Hollywood's main fare this summer.   
 You'll notice that the big spike happens in May. Part of the spike is due to January, February, and March being the so-called "dump months", where companies put their stale movies out to pasture. The other part of the equation is that studios want to capitalize on this ennui, so they send their big budget blockbusters down the pipeline in May.  ,  , and  were all released in May this year, but you'll notice that they were beaten out by movies released in June ( ) and August ( ):   
 In 2013, the biggest opening weekend in summer was   at $174 million. That movie opened in May.  , another May movie, opened at $97 million. Both of those movies opened with a bigger first weekend than the biggest May movie in 2014. In I 's case, its opening weekend was bigger than   and  combined, and almost as big as   and   combined:   
 What you'll also notice is that 2013 was exponentially more top heavy than 2014, with more movies above the $95 million opening weekend mark. Tally up the 11 biggest opening weekends of 2014, 2013, 2012 and you'll find that 2014 is lagging around $40 million from a year prior and around $25 million from 2014:   
 "It's a noticeable difference," Phil Contrino, the chief analyst at BoxOffice.com, told me. "We really needed more films that ended up in the $80 million-$150 million range domestically. That would have helped compensate for the tentpoles that ended up underperforming slightly." One of those tentpoles was   which ended up opening at $91 million. That number isn't shabby, but it's not as big as   was nor was it as big as the original  , which opened to a   Shortly after  's opening weekend, Sony announced it was delaying the franchise until 2018. Despite the underperformance of  , there were two movies this summer whose success was particularly surprising. The first was  ,  . The other has been   which provided a big boost to summer movie season.   opened in August, and has since overtaken  (which opened in June) in total domestic gross. But even with that achievement,    is still lagging behind the blockbusters of 2012 and 2013 like    , and  :   
 "  has definitely turned into a must-see, and that means it won't fade as quickly as other titles," Contrino said. "It also helps that late August/early September won't bring any new blockbusters to the market." So we know that movie studios didn't make as much money as in previous years. And we know that people didn't go see as many movies with as much enthusiasm as they did last year and the year before. But those facts ignore one simple question: were the movies this year comparable to the one's before? Or more simply, did studios know this would be a down year and punted? "The movie industry is cyclical, and we're definitely in a down year, but that has a lot to do with the fact that 2015's slate is so impressive," Contrino explained. "Many of the strongest franchises are lined up for 2015, and 2014 has suffered as a result." The 2015 summer movie season is as follows: Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 