What 'The Giver' and 'Obvious Child' say about abortion in America
In the summer of 2014, abortion became an unlikely subject for the multiplex. Both indie comedy   and novel adaptation   tackled the subject — albeit much more obliquely in the latter case. (Though abortion rights opponents readily saw  as an anti-abortion film, what's presented in it is actually infanticide.) Both films looked at abortion from politically opposite viewpoints. Not that either film was meant as a political treatise on reproductive rights, but moviegoers — especially the more politically attuned ones — were quick to note the political undertones of the stories. Those films, she told me, "are n Enter  . According to Sisson, this isn't the first film to portray abortion as something that doesn't destroy a young woman's life. However, she told me, "it is different in that it certainly is the first film that unabashedly talks about abortion   as hidden plot twist — it makes it the talking point of the film." Its uniqueness is also owed to the fact that its a comedy, she notes. The film, which marks the directorial debut of Gillian Robespierre, has been dubbed the " " because, well, it's a romantic comedy that deals with abortion. But it isn't   abortion — it's about a woman who has an abortion, and, unlike many other women in movies who have abortions, she gets a happy ending. Because of that happy ending, Variety called the film "refreshingly honest." Variety is hardly alone.  [if gte mso 9]><xml> 0   0   1   340   1940   Vox Media   16   4   2276   14.0 </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 9]><xml> Normal   0               false   false   false      EN-US   JA   X-NONE </xml><![endif] [if gte mso 9]><xml> </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 10]>
<style>
 /* Style Definitions */
table.MsoNormalTable
	{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0in;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}
</style>
<![endif] 's Amanda Hess took the praise one step further: " is the most honest movie about abortion that I've seen," read her article's headline. Like Sciortino, Hess notes how relatable the film is to the lived experience of many American women. As research from the   shows, 40 percent of "unintended" pregnancies are aborted. By the age of 45, estimates project that 30 percent of American women will have had an abortion.   also demonstrates that most women (95 percent) who have abortions feel they made the right decision.  then, is an attempt to tell a story that fits those numbers. Cristina Richie, Flatley Fellow in theological ethics at Boston College, agrees that   is an honest film, but notes its honesty isn't owed to the fact that it ends in abortion, " , meanwhile, presents a scenario that has resonated with pro-life advocates. While the film is in no way To his surprise, his father began very carefully to direct the needle into the top of the new child's forehead, puncturing the place where the fragile skin pulsed. The newborn squirmed, and wailed faintly. … Still in the special voice, his father was saying, "I know, I know. It hurts, little guy. But I have to use a vein, and the veins in your arm are still too teeny-weeny." He pushed the plunger very slowly, injecting the liquid into the scalp vein until the syringe was empty. "All done. That wasn't so bad, was it?" Jonas heard his father say cheerfully. It's disturbing enough to watch a baby receive a lethal injection in its brain. But the moment is further intensified by the sing-song way Father tries to calm the very baby he's killing. On top of this, Father has no idea he's actually hurting or killing the child. To be clear, what happens in   is not an abortion.  , ethicist at Fordham University and author of a forthcoming book on abortion, told me that not all would see the murder scene in   as a nod to abortion because many believe that "babies after birth are different, morally speaking, than babies before birth." But for Camosy, that's a "questionable assumption." It is warranted, he argues, to draw a parallel between Jonas' father and abortion. "Jonas' father is guilty of murder because he kills a living (albeit immature) member of our species — abortion kills a living (albeit immature) member of our species, as well." As Alyssa Rosenberg   at the Washington Post, because of the way it nods toward these questions and other contemporary political issues, conservatives have given   a right-handed thumb way, way up. Sarah Palin called the film " ," and   as a "tribute to individualism, the human spirit, and the sanctity of human life." But as Rosenberg notes, the politics of   aren't nearly so straightforward: "progressives could easily claim that part of the nightmare of   is the way it turns some women into professional baby vessels, stripping away their reproductive choices." And  , for Ms. Magazine, argues that rather than promoting a pro-life message,  actually deconstructs it: That the images of "release to elsewhere" are juxtaposed with murderous images — the slaughter of elephants, the killing of innocents by military forces — could be interpreted as furthering the pro-life claim that the taking of "life" is murder. However, the suggestion that murder of the past (war, genocide, etc.) has been supplanted with a different kind of murder which is no better emphasizes the hypocrisy at the heart of the pro-life stance:  that those who condemn abortion as "murder" also call for the killing of abortion providers and/or support war, resist gun control, and fail to condemn genocide In spite of all of its rightly earned praise, it's hard to pretend   is free of any sort of political context. Writes Hess: The filmmakers have teamed up with abortion-rights group NARAL to sell the movie, and promotional materials state that "  is a story that depicts one young woman's reality and many women's rights." And the movie features the most charmingly competent Planned Parenthood doctor that a young, sexually active woman has ever seen. (Unlike   "Free Clinic" or  's "Women Now," Planned Parenthood signed on to display its insignia in the film.) At the same time, some see  as being set within a different but equally charged political context. The film was produced by Walden Media, and according to one  , the production company has been known to "push life-affirming messages." (By "life-affirming," the critic specifically means "pro-life.") Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 