An American's guide to the second royal child
Kate Middleton, now Duchess of Cambridge and wife of Prince William, announced on Monday that she is pregnant with the couple's second child. The news sent people who care about the royal family into an excited frenzy. If you're not one of those people, you might be annoyed or confused by the excessive attention being paid to the two Brits and their pregnancy. Here's everything you need to know to understand the next royal baby, and why people care so much: The official Twitter account of the   announced early Monday morning that William and Kate are  . She is less than 12 weeks pregnant, a  ,  Grandpa Prince Charles  that the second royal child will be born in April 2015. The future baby will be the fourth in line to the throne behind his or her grandfather, father, and brother, in that order. Having a second child when you are in line for the royal throne is sometimes referred to as creating a " ." The idea here is that if anything were to happen to the first heir, a second child would be there to take the throne. It is, however, unlikely that a second child would ever become a monarch. Because of the way the line of succession works, any children that George has would be placed higher up in the line than his younger sibling.  "Spare heir" also refers to the way second children in the royal family are treated. Because they are very unlikely to ever be monarchs, younger siblings are less important to the public. Already,   about whether this pregnancy is as important as George's was. Arguably, this allows the younger sibling to live a freer life because they are not destined to be monarchs. While William has gotten married and had a kid, leading a responsible royal life, Harry has   and dated . The case holds true for Prince Charles and his brother Prince Edward (who is perhaps best know in the United States for his marriage to Sarah Ferguson, a.k.a. Fergie). The next baby may never rule, but he or she could easily have more fun.   
 Kate Middleton pregnant with George in April 2013. (WPA Pool/Getty) "It may be that the whole phenomenon of monarchy is irrational, but that doesn't mean that when we look at it we should behave like spectators at Bedlam. Cheerful curiosity can easily become cruelty. It can easily become fatal,"   "We don't cut off the heads of royal ladies these days, but we do sacrifice them, and we did memorably drive one to destruction a scant generation ago." During Kate's last pregnancy, the bump watch was also a way to examine her very expensive pregnancy fashion. The duchess,  , was complimented for her  ,  , and ( )  . Nope. When any female celebrity — f  —   
 Kate Middelton and Princess Diana present the new royal babies (Anwar Hussein/Getty) Mostly, yes. But they are doing things in their own way and at their own pace. As William is the second in line to the royal throne, it was hoped and expected that he would have a child in order to continue the royal family. He did, in 2013. But William and Kate symbolize, for many, progress in the royal family. They are almost constantly compared to Prince Charles and Princess Diana, even down to the presenting of their first child, Prince George, to the masses. But in reality, William and Kate did not follow the exact footsteps of his parents. The two met in college, but did not marry until she and William were 29 years old. Diana was 20 years old when she married Prince Charles.    
 Princess Diana and Prince Charles pose with William as a baby (Anwar Hussein/Getty) Not at all. Royal families have always been subject to baby watches. Think about King Henry VIII. His entire 30-year reign during the 16th century was famously shaped by his desperate search for an heir to the throne. Wives were cast aside in pursuit of that single goal. Royal pregnancies weren't formally announced in the 1500s, but news often leaked and a ruling family's subjects obsessed over when the next heir would be born.  Most Americans don't really care about the royal baby. According to polling by the Pew Research Center, a quarter of Americans paid "very" or "fairly" close attention to the birth of Prince George in 2013.   
 ( ) The largest group that did care was the 55-64 year old range, at 36 percent. This may be due to hold-over from the early death of Diana or because that group of people were old enough to watch Diana and Charles wed, reproduce, and split. According to Pew,   closely followed the death of Diana. That's 50 percent more than any other event in the royal family since 1992.   
 Kate Middleton on the cover of People Kate is an international celebrity. Since the royal wedding, she has been on the cover of People more than anyone else, and everything a celebrity does in American and British society is publicized. On top of that, the press, particularly the British press, notoriously pays particularly close attention to the royal family. Everything she does,  , is photographed and publicized. Rumors swirl that she has  ,  , is  , and is  . Every move she makes is documented. She's not the first. When Diana died in 1997, after  Yes. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 