Why Boardwalk Empire just jumped from 1924 to 1931
HBO's   began its fifth and final season last night, and it did so in a fashion that may have you asking more than a few questions. Here are answers to those questions. Yes. Yes, it did. Creator and showrunner Terence Winter explained   that he did so because it seemed appropriate to close out the show at the end of prohibition, just as it began with the start of the law. Now, prohibition isn't quite done for in 1931, but it's pretty obvious it's on the way out. That's what the show is playing with. It skipped over several things, actually, but let's boil it down to the three most important ones. That's hard to say. Certainly the eight-episode order for the final season, along with the fact that previous seasons' ratings have steadily declined, suggests that HBO had plenty of reason to pull the plug and did so at the first opportunity. (Even with a reduced budget, this is still a very expensive show.) But in that Hitfix interview, Winter argues that the show is Nucky Thompson's story, and Nucky Thompson's story has almost run out. He's more or less right about that, too. One of the things that made season four so great was that it largely left Nucky behind, turning him into a supporting character on his own show. He took on a role similar to that of Rothstein or Al Capone in previous seasons: a major underworld heavyweight who could hurt or help the other characters as he decided. Instead, season four focused on the struggle between Chalky White (Michael Kenneth Williams) and Valentin Narcisse (Jeffrey Wright), which was all the more remarkable for being about very different, conflicting attempts at self-definition by two black men. But season five returns its focus to Nucky in a big way, as you can tell from all of the flashbacks to his childhood scattered throughout the premiere. Steve Buscemi, who plays Nucky, is a great actor, and there have been hints of something more to the character over the years, but it's also not hard to feel slightly disappointed by this shift in focus. Nucky was never as interesting as his supporting cast, even when the show was forthrightly focused on him. Assuming Winter really did have the idea to wrap up the show (and he might be playing nice because he wants HBO to pick up  ), it's disappointing he didn't realize how much mileage there might have been from Nucky shifting to the sidelines for a few more seasons, before finally returning to centerstage when the show was ready to end. Not really, no. There are occasional hints of the chaos sweeping American society at this point — as when Margaret's boss commits suicide in front of his employees or when Chalky breaks free from a prison chain gang — but for the most part, the characters are insulated from economic disaster. Hell, Nucky spends the bulk of the episode living it up in Havana (yet another location on the show's long list of them) before someone makes an attempt on his life. On the other hand, this premiere focuses so much on Nucky that it's hard to tell just how the Depression will affect the show as a whole. As the scope of the series gradually broadens, perhaps we'll get a stronger sense of just how the Depression has hurt even the show's richest characters, at least a little bit. Are you kidding? You've watched this show before, right?  always starts slowly, with a bunch of stories that seem to have nothing to do with each other, then slowly begins to weave them all together, often in thrilling fashion. This premiere was one of the show's weaker ones, and it didn't do much to justify the time jump (nor the frequent jumps back to Nucky's childhood), but it was still beautifully made television, and it suggested several intriguing places for the show to go in the seven episodes left to it. That's more than enough for me, at least for right now.  — with its Martin Scorsese-directed pilot and "gangsters in the ‘20s" vibe — will probably always seem like a slightly disappointing footnote in HBO's overall history. It was meant to be the network's next  , and instead,   came in and stole all of its thunder. Then, it steadily lost ratings power from season to season, and the launch of its final season almost feels like an afterthought. [if gte mso 9]><xml> 0   0   1   952   5428   Vox Media   45   12   6368   14.0 </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 9]><xml> Normal   0               false   false   false      EN-US   JA   X-NONE </xml><![endif] [if gte mso 9]><xml> </xml><![endif]   [if gte mso 10]>
<style>
 /* Style Definitions */
table.MsoNormalTable
	{mso-style-name:"Table Normal";
	mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0;
	mso-tstyle-colband-size:0;
	mso-style-noshow:yes;
	mso-style-priority:99;
	mso-style-parent:"";
	mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt;
	mso-para-margin:0in;
	mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;
	mso-pagination:widow-orphan;
	font-size:12.0pt;
	font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-ascii-theme-font:minor-latin;
	mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria;
	mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin;}
</style>
<![endif] But  , even if it's rarely touched true greatness, has usually been a very good, very solid sort of drama, the kind of handsomely mounted show that would have felt revelatory last decade but now feels ever so slightly tired in this age of hyper-crazed storytelling. Each season of this show has felt satisfying both in and of itself and as part of a larger whole. And if this final season can make that larger whole make sense, this will be a real treat for those who stumble upon it in the decades to come. Here's hoping it can manage that trick. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 