Today is the 10th anniversary of the sitcom Joey. How are you doing?
It's September 9, which can mean only one thing: it's   Day! In case you've been living under a rock and didn't have the date circled on your calendar, we'll remind you that everybody's favorite   spinoff debuted on this day 10 years ago. The show was very quickly a success, with over 18 million people watching its pilot. It was so much of a success, in fact, that NBC renewed it for a second season  , a decision the network never regretted. In honor of   Day, here are five things you probably didn't know about  . Have you ever been watching a rerun of   when you saw the name "Robert Carlock" or "Matt Hubbard" come up in the writing credits, only to wonder where you'd seen those names before? Well, if you didn't answer that question yourself with the help of Google, we're here to tell you both men were extremely important writers on the Emmy-winning sitcom  . In fact, both were nominated for several writing Emmys for their work on the show, with Hubbard winning for his script for "Reunion." Now you know one more thing   and   have in common! Need proof? Here's a joke from   that later appeared pretty much exactly like this in a much-acclaimed episode of  ! NBC pulled   from its schedule midway through its second season for some reason, then brought it back in March against  . At the time,   could not be beaten, so   suffered a substantial ratings drop (probably because NBC had taken it off the air for several months!). NBC pulled it from the air after that, and the remaining eight episodes never aired in the US, nor have they ever surfaced here via legal means. That's the official story, at least.  , we're probably guessing those episodes were so unfathomably great that to look upon them would have burned people's eyes out of their sockets. Most publications were kind to   in their initial reviews of the project. It got good ink in the  , and Entertainment Weekly critic Gillian Flynn (later the author of  )   as to proclaim it a "reassurance" that the sitcom was not dead. This is in marked contrast to  's parent show,  , which received   when it debuted in 1994. (  had its share of pans, too, but the reviews skewed much more toward praise than you might expect.) Specifically the fifth and 13th episodes of season one. That was something you didn't know about  , huh? The director who helmed the most episodes of   was Kevin S. Bright, who also produced   and directed many episodes of that show. Bright blamed NBC for the ruination of  , telling  : On   Joey was a womaniser but we enjoyed his exploits. He was a solid friend, a guy you knew you could count on. ... Joey was deconstructed to be a guy who couldn't get a job, couldn't ask a girl out. He became a pathetic, mopey character. I felt he was moving in the wrong direction, but I was not heard. At least that's the going rate  , where someone realizes the true value of  . Please enjoy the best of  . Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 