Two directors make a movie from the same script in the year's best new reality show
  ########  BEGIN SNIPPET  ########   Do you like going to the movies, but always wonder how they're made? Are you interested in the process that goes into the creation of art — any art? Do you just want to see engaging, creative people butting heads while they try to accomplish the impossible? Then Starz's new reality series,  , which  I'm not usually a huge fan of reality TV, but   sucked me in from the word go. It's from Chris Moore, whom you might remember as one of the major figures of the late, great movie-oriented reality series  , and depicts two different first-time directors making movies from the same script, examining their approaches to the material and to filmmaking itself. One of them will eventually win a $250,000 prize when all is said and done, but it's not the (largely superfluous) competitive aspect that makes   so much fun. Here are four other reasons the show is one of the best reality shows in years. And if you're intrigued, check out my full interview with Moore. The two directors Moore and his team selected couldn't be more different. Anna Martemucci is a screenwriter who rose out of the world of independent filmmaking and now wants to try her hand at directing. Her approach to the central script — about a bunch of friends gathering during their first Thanksgiving weekend home from college — is deeply personal, much more in line with acclaimed indie comedies that sweep awards at Sundance. Meanwhile, her competition comes from Shane Dawson, a YouTube star who wants to turn the film into a bawdy comedy with big gags. Yet even in the midst of those overriding tones, Anna and Shane find room for other thoughts and ideas. Their backgrounds and ideas of what makes a successful film couldn't be more different, but they're both strong storytellers, and that comes through in every frame, even when they're having the inevitable reality show meltdowns. Plenty about the film industry has changed since   was on the air, but the lively, irascible Moore is much the same. Now, however, he has to hustle harder to find the money to put the films together, which means we get to see even more of him at his best. (There are frequent moments in the first two episodes where Anna and Shane wonder if the money to make the films will ever show up.) Moore is perhaps less immediately prone to irritation than he was in  , but his new avuncular nature has made him even more unpredictable and fascinating. When the camera captures Anna talking smack about Moore in episode two and she realizes she's being filmed, it's a legitimately queasy moment. It's all in good fun, but you always wonder when Moore might finally decide he's had enough of this. Without turning into a treatise on the subject,   has substantial insight into how men and women approach the creative process differently and how Hollywood is subconsciously skewed toward a male point-of-view. The show never turns Shane or Anna into symbols of how men or women approach these projects, but it's interesting to see how Shane settles much more easily into the role of chief decision-maker than Anna (who's naturally more collaborative) does. And while collaborative filmmakers like Robert Altman and Mike Leigh have had long, successful careers in film, the medium is skewed much more toward those who can step up and start making the vast majority of the calls. In its own subtle way,   suggests that might also mean the industry is tilted toward men in general. Though every episode takes its time to make sure you understand things, it also keeps the story moving forward.   could get bogged down in minutiae from time to time, and that's never a problem on  . This weekend's premiere deals with Anna and Shane working on their versions of the script — and their clashes with the screenwriter over same — while next week's episode digs into the pre-production process. It's deep enough to be catnip for movie fans, but it's also inherently intriguing to neophytes. Things move on  , simply because there's no time to stop and think too hard about what's next. There's always another crisis around the corner. The Chair    . Chris Moore has produced many films, but his name will forever be most associated with  , the film that launched Matt Damon and Ben Affleck to super-stardom and that gave Moore an entry to the level of Hollywood's top producers. Since then, he's produced many films with Damon or Affleck — including   and   — and many without  including the   movies. But for many TV fans, he's perhaps best known as the grouchy central figure of the three-season early '00s reality series  , where his producer's acumen frequently came into conflict with the first-time directors who won a chance to make their debut feature on the show. Now, he returns to TV with the similarly movie-themed  , but the film industry has changed around him. He talked to Vox about the changing face of the business and why he doesn't mind his directors giving him shit.  This is such an unconventional way of doing both a reality show and making a movie. How did you convince anybody to do this?  It's one of these ideas that sat in my head, probably for the last five years. Then about three years ago, I started pitching it. There were a lot of networks who were psyched  to have the documentary,   given my experience on   and some of the other stuff I've been part   of. They're like, "That would probably be a good show." There   was a ton of people who, right away, thought the idea was really cool. Like in the business, people love the idea   like, "Yeah. Let's see two people do it." They even love the sort   of competition nature of you know somebody's out there trying to win the   money, because to some extent that's our job everyday. I know when I try to   get a movie made, that there's 10 other producers trying to get movies made   that day, and every studio knows there's other movies. So that part of it was easy. The hardest part was,   nobody wanted to pay for the movies, because there's a sort of conventional   way to them. It's hard enough to get people to come see one movie. How are   you going to get your money back on two movies, particularly when people know   it's the same story, right? I say that's the whole conceit. The whole conceit is,   you're interested in seeing both people's version of the story. So to some   extent, I was like, "It seems to me, that because there's two movies, we   have a better chance of getting people to see both movies, right? Or at   least, they'll go to the person they like better in the show and see their   movie, right?" I never understood that, to be honest.  And it wasn't   also designed to be first time directors — when I went out to sell it, I had   some experienced directors who were interested in doing it. They wanted to do   it if they can get a little bit more money than what we ended up with. And so   I ended up with first timers because of the budget level. It was very   difficult to convince people to do it. But my goal for   is to   have, "Here's Popeye the Sailor, everybody knows who he is, we haven't   seen a movie in a long time. Here's David O. Russell's version of Popeye and   Kevin Smith's version of Popeye." I'd watch that documentary, and I would   see both those movies. And I bet they'd be really   different.  What do you find so interesting about the   differences in directorial spins?  It's all about   storytelling for me. And I love a good story. I love being told a good   story. I grew up in the generation of movies. I love movies and television. I   had a TV in my bedroom, which is probably bad parenting from my parents'   point of view. But I just think stories are a great way to escape your life,   they're a great way to learn about stuff. I think storytelling with a camera   and a microphone and all of the special effects software that exists today,   is really fun. I heard a quote once from Spielberg where he said, "Well,   we had to wait until they could make it look like it was real dinosaurs,   before we could do  ." To me that's the right answer, which   is you want to tell the story in the best way it can be told. So I'm always   fascinated by watching, and I'm inspired by watching great directors tell   stories in different ways, and to some extent, tell very different stories   with the same base material. I would say if you watch the three Tim Burton   Batmans, they're totally different than the three Christopher Nolan   Batmans. Right?    
 Anna Martemucci is one of the two directors chosen for The Chair. (Starz)  What do you think has changed the most about how independent   films are made and financed, since you made   all those   years ago?  Sadly, the industry as a whole has made a   decision that there's no business in it. When we were doing  ,   Harvey Weinstein was out there, and he obviously was our partner in it. Fox   Searchlight was just starting up. Paramount had its own division. Warner   Bros. had its own division. There were like five other independent companies,   Thinkfilm and October Films and Good Machine. There was a lot of people. The film festivals were going gang-busters, Sundance and Toronto, and Telluride, and   Cannes. People were interested. And my personal opinion — and I'm sure this is   not what I should say if I care about my future — but to some extent, the   bankers and the MBAs and other people took over, and every movie has to on   paper look like it's going to hit a given margin. And as soon as you start   applying margins to creative conversations, it's very hard. I say to people   all the time, "There's no chance in Hell Matt and Ben and I would have   been able to get   made now." It might be hard to   get   made now, because there were no stars, and it was a $10 million movie. Like now, if you go out, you're either making a $2 million movie or   you're making a $60 million movie. The reason is solely based on, "Well,   for $60 million, we can increase our margin." And at $2 million, what   that really means is, there is no margin on this movie. But that cost is so   low, we might as well make it anyway. To me, it's a totally different time,   which is why the studio in this story is me. It's me and a bunch of brave   interesting people from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, who decided to back me on   this.  So what do you think has been the   impact of different revenue streams like VOD or streaming surfaces? And is that something you take into   consideration as   goes forward?  I think that all of those were examples of the larger   behavior model of humans, which is that everybody loves the concept of   anywhere, any time, on any device. And so the problem is, that spreads out your   audience. So you have a bunch of different collections you have to do to get   your money back. Whereas in the old days, there were like three. There was   home video, there was foreign, and there was domestic box office.  The other problem is, I don't think humans are going to   have all of these different ways all of the time. I just don't think they can   afford it. In the case of  , for instance, you've got to   subscribe to Starz to watch the show. I would be willing to bet there's a lot   of Shane Dawson fans who are not subscribers to Starz. And the question is,   are they going to add another way to watch content to watch this? I think that's   part of the problem right now, is a lot of the content that's being made also   has to carry the burden of the business model behind the content.   
 Shane Dawson's YouTube following is a major plot point of The Chair. (Starz) To me, the business models are still trying to   figure themselves out, and I don't envy the people that are trying to figure   it out. Because it's probably a scary proposition when you hear things like "cut the cord," when you're like, "Well, I'll just get in on Apple   TV." Now, for content creators, I think we're in a really great moment,   only because enough of the business models have proven themselves successful   enough that you have a bunch of new players. You have Amazon paying for   stuff. You have Netflix paying for stuff. You have different ways that people   are getting their money back. So as a pure content player, where I'm not   invested in the business model, I got more people I can go to sell stuff to. But I think in general, I hope we narrow this down and we get through it. I   am also old enough to remember very clearly two other moments in the industry   when this exact same thing happened. One was when home video started in the   first place. There was a shitload of these small home-video companies, like    , a big movie people know was made by a little company called   Vestron. Rambo is made by a home-video company called IVE. There are   other ones like Hemdale and other stuff. They all got weeded out by —   what's the biggest home video company on the world now? — Warner Bros. The   point is, they get weeded out once they figure out the business model. The   same thing happened in cable TV. There are all these channels and all these   original programming, and all these other stuff. And they all sort of got weeded down to the ones we can both   name. So we're going through that right now online.   People are figuring it out, and they're seeing what happens, and a lot of   those people are coming into business. But Warner Bros was probably one of the   biggest movie studios back then; now they're the biggest home video player.   And let's not be surprised that in the next five years, they become the   biggest provider of content. That's the way the game gets played. So for me,   I like it right now because I have enough experience to go sell stuff to some   of the new people, but I also have the experience to sell into the old   process. And I think it's going to be a marriage, like what we're doing with   Starz, where you watch the shows on that, but you're going to be able to get a   bunch of other content at Starz.com and at other places. Starz has Starz Play   and Starz-On-Demand, so you don't have to watch it on Saturday nights at   11:00. You can watch it when you want. It's a combination of those things   that is going to be really fun.  So when you were entering this process with   Anna and Shane, what did you find immediately interesting about the   difference of their approaches to this material and the filmmaking process?  I got to say, the first thing was the shocking   revelation that there is no sort of movie-flagpole for the first Thanksgiving   after college movies. Like Shane and Anna both had realized they weren't   competing against any other movies that have done it. Like when we did    , there's been 700 movies about people losing their virginity. So both of them looked at that as a real   opportunity to create sort of a real coming-of-age thing. I think that the   fascinating thing was that Shane really looked at it from a comedic point-of-view and Ana created a much more personal story. What was   really fun for me was watching them make that decision about why one would be   better than the other. I think part of it is because Shane never went to   college, and he never had the experience of coming home on Thanksgiving   weekend, or what that was like. Whereas, Anna did. So I was amazed at   that level of personal relationship to the material that they put into the   process.  There are lots of moments in the first two episodes that deal with how the industry and filmmaking process in general differ for men and women. Did you find that illustrative at all?  Absolutely. But what I would say is, the illustrative   of the fact that I don't know that gender is actually a specific factor in   being a good storyteller. Meaning that, there are certain things, like if you   want to be a weightlifter, most likely the man's going to be able to lift   more weight. There's also things like sweetness or — I don't know, just   romance or sappiness or whatever — maybe the girl's going to understand that   better than the guy, but Shane has got some of the most moving scenes in a   movie I'd seen.  Again, some people have asked me, did I do that on   purpose? Did I pick a man and woman? Honestly, I didn't. And I'd love to take   more credit for having seen how different that would be. But the truth of the   matter is, I find them both really talented and I really thought they had   great takes on making the movie. I live and am married for 25 years to a   woman who's a bad-ass producer, probably a better producer than I am. So the   gender thing in this, I don't think has a big effect. The   thing I'm always surprised by, is how few women there are who are big   directors. I don't think it's because they can't do it. I think it's   something about the lifestyle. I think it's something about what you have to   do to get the jobs. It's something about the people hiring directors are all   men. So it's weird. I don't know. You know what I mean? It definitely   continues to be part of the story. In Anna's case, she also is in this sort   of three-man creative team with her husband and her brother-in-law, which   even adds to the dynamic of sort of her being the woman and the director, and   the two of them being men. And we've had some people who've worked on the   show who feel like sometimes Victor and Phil can be overbearing unfairly. We   believe that there'll be some social media when the episodes run about,   "It's just unfair." Or "That would never happen to a   man." I would say that I agree with that. There's some shit that happens   that I don't believe would ever happen to a man.    was very clear about how you   picked the scripts, how you picked the director. Here, we just get there and   we have the two directors and the script selected already. How did you make   that choice to do that with this show? For me, it's not a show about finding the next great   American director. That's what   was always about. It's really a   storytelling comparison. It's an idea of, there are many decisions you can   make every time you tell a story, and my loftier, making me sound more like some asshole reason for doing it is, I   really want the world at large to become much more appreciative of directors   and writers. I think that when you love a movie, you actually love their work   more than you love the actor's work. I think actors are really, really   important and I love them. I obviously came up with two big ones. But I think   that if we can move that pencil, it would be great. So for me, it's a very   different thing than the   experiment of going out and   giving people first chances, and they were trying to break   through the walls of Hollywood. I'm not trying to break through any walls.   I'm picking people already in the business. These guys already had agents. They'd already made stuff. I'm trying to show the world how fucking hard it   is to make a good movie. And every time you find one, you should scream it at   the top of your lungs that this one's really good, and maybe go on IMDB and   learn who that director was. Because that should be important to you. That's   really my loftier goal. I think that we ended up with first-timers just   because of the budget level, but that wasn't the goal of this was to do   first-timers.  There are scenes here where both Anna and   Shane are caught shit-talking you. What did you think as you saw that footage   come in, and did you just accept it as part of filmmaking process?  My kid shit-talks me at school. Probably right now. The point is, look they were honest. Obviously, I'm involved in the show. So   if I thought it was bullshit or they were being super mean or whatever, I   wouldn't have let it be in the show. The point is that's how they really   feel, and the truth of the matter is, I didn't have the fucking money. So in   a lot of those scenes, it was 100 percent true. Luckily, I did have the experience of three years on  ,   so I want it to be honest. And that's why the thing I love about the show   more than anything else, is the vlogs. We had no idea how honest Shane and   Anna were going to be when they put themselves on camera. And I think it   works really well in the show.   ########  END SNIPPET  ########     