What it was like to be next to George W. Bush on 9/11
Ari Fleischer, President George W. Bush's Press Secretary at the time of the 9/11 attacks, is live-tweeting memories of what it was like to be on the inside when the news broke. Reading through them reminds you just how panicked the day was — for instance, according to Fleischer, the administration was worried that there was an enemy agent on Air Force One, of all places. Obviously, this exercise is a touch self-serving: unsurprisingly, some of Fleischer's tweets are essentially hagiography of Bush's "brilliant" response to the attacks. Setting those aside, the collected tweets amount to a really interesting, and horrifying, reminder of the raw uncertainty and fear that pervaded not only the nation, but also its highest officials, on the day of the attack. Here they are, up to about 12:30 EST: 8:40am, 9-11, 2001: I was in the motorcade 4 the drive from the Colony Beach & Tennis Resort in Sarasota, FL 2the Emma Booker Elem. School. 8:46 Flight 11 crashes into the North Tower. The motorcade was a few minutes away from arriving at the school. Approx 8:50: I got a page on my pager (we didn't have blackberries then and the iPhone hadn't been invented) telling me a plane hit the WTC. As soon as I got the page, I hussled out of my car 2tell the Pres. He was shaking hands with school officials - none of whom knew the news. After the President finished shaking hands, Karl Rove informed him of what we thought had to be an "accident." 9:00 POTUS goes into a holding room and calls Condi. He instructs her 2make resources avail to help NY, still thinking it was an accident. After the call, POTUS goes into the classroom and starts reading a book to the kids. The press is in the back of the room. I suspect by now most people are watching TV, watching events unfold. I was in the classroom with the President watching the reading event. 9:03 United Flight 175 crashes into the South Tower. 9:05 WH Chief of Staff Andy Card interrupts the Pres to whisper in his hear - the second tower has been hit. "America is under attack." Just before Andy walked in, I got a 2nd page saying the 2nd tower had been hit. I knew instantly it had to be terrorism. The Pres. was going to address the press re the "accident". Given the news re the 2nd tower, I didn't think he should address the press yet. I wrote on back of a legal pad "DON'T SAY ANYTHING YET". I wanted him 2b briefed b4 talking. I put my back to the press & held up the sign. The President continued the reading event for several more minutes. Years later, Michael Moore criticized Bush for not leaving immediately. Bush said later he stayed 2collect his thoughts and send a signal of calm. He said he didn't want 2bolt from his chair and alarm the nation. POTUS left the event and went into the holding room 2get briefed/ work the phones. Here is a picture of the scene.  I started 2take notes of what Bush was saying and doing. I have some 6 pages of notes on a legal pad. The originals are in a bank vault now. Someone wheeled a TV into the holding room. Here's the scene:  9:30 Bush addressed a group in the gym that expected 2hear remarks on education. Few people there knew of the attack. No twitter back then. Here's what Bush said:   Today, we've had a national tragedy. Two airplanes have crashed into the World Trade Center in an apparent terrorist attack on our country. I have spoken to the vice president, to the governor of New York, to the director of the FBI, and I've ordered that the full resources of the federal government go to help... ...the victims and their families and to conduct a full-scale investigation to hunt down and to find those folks who committed this act. Terrorism against our nation will not stand.  And now, if you'd join me in a moment of silence. We boarded the motorcade and drove [fast] to Air Force One, planning for a return to Washington, D.C. 9:37 American Airlines Flight 77 crashes into the Pentagon. POTUS is told of attack on the Pentagon by either the Secret Service in the front of the limo, or by Condi on the phone. I don't remember. 9:45 We boarded Air Force One. I was in my seat for the takeoff and then spent most of the rest of the day in the President's cabin. FOne Capt. Mark Tillman told me 10 yrs later that we took off at unusually steep ascent bcause he had a report of a sniper at end of runway. Colonel Tillman also told the media years later that the control tower told him that an unidentified plane was descending toward AFOne. in the President's cabin, I was busy taking notes. He was mostly on the phone with the VP, SecDef Rumsfeld, Gov Pataki and Mayor Giuliani. Maddeningly, the phone connecting the Pres. to the bunker under the WH (PEOC - Presidential Emergency Operations Center) kept cutting out. 9:59 The South Tower of the World Trade Center collapses. The TVs aboard AFOne could only pick up signals as we flew over land areas with good signals. The transmissions kept coming in and out. After 9/11, we recognized that the technology needed a major upgrade. In terms of communications, AFOne today is unlike how it was on 9/11. (1/2) Bush to VP: "We're at war...We're going to take care of this. When we find out who did this, they're not going 2like me as President." (2/2) Bush to VP (cont): "Sombody's going to pay." 10:07 United Flight 93 crashes in a field in Pennsylvania. The first report we got on AFOne was that Flight 93 crashed "near Camp David." The locations are some 100 miles apart. After the 3rd plane hit the Pentagon, we were told there were 3 aircraft "missing". After Flight 93, we thought 2 more attacks coming. The military drills 4 everything. They kicked in old Cold War training for how 2 protect POTUS. We flew at 45,000 feet in a random pattern. The Secret Service did not want us to return to DC. They thought Andrew Air Force Base and the White House could be targets. Around 10:20: Bush authorized military to go to Def Con 3, the highest level of military alert since the 1973 Yom Kippur War. At 10:32, the Pres. reported an amazing phone call. POTUS was talking to the military aide while he (Bush) was on the phone with the VP. "A call came into the switchboard saying 'Angel is next,'" Bush said. 'Angel' was the codeword for Air Force One. Col. Tillman, upon hearing the news, posted an armed Air Force Security Officer at the base of the steps leading up to the cockpit of AFOne. Think about that. Aboard one of the most secure spots on earth, with nothing but trusted aides/Secret Service, the fear was an inside attack Bush also told VP - and I quote - "We're at war Dick and we're going to find out who did this and we're going to kick their ass." My notes show I wrote that a commercial popped up on the TV for a hair removal product. Seemed a little out of place... Here is a copy of one page from my notes while all this was going on:  ***Sorry to do this - I need to pause my tweets until roughly noon. I'll resume then. All you'll miss is the flight to Barksdale AFB.*** ***Sorry for the break. I'll resume the "live" tweets now.*** Bush wanted to get back 2DC, but given Secret Service opposition, we waited. We needed 2top off AFOne's tank & POTUS wanted 2address nation. The military chose Barksdale Air Force base in Louisiana as a good place to land until we could figure out where we were going. Here is a scene aboard AFOne in POTUS's cabin, enroute Barksdale.  12:05 We landed at Barksdale. We had no motorcade. Very few Secret Service. Everything was improvised. The base commander hosted Bush in his office while the staff worked on setting up a room for POTUS to address the nation. 12:25 (1/3) Bush calls Cheney in the PEOC: "I think it's important for the people to see the government is functioning..." (2/3) "...because the TV shows our nation has been blasted and bombed. Government is not chaotic. It's functioning smoothly." (3/3) "We're going to get the bastards." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 