Do violent video games actually make people more violent?
Over the past few decades, the people behind several different   — including Newtown, Columbine, and the 2011 attacks that led to 77 deaths in Norway — were found to be regular players of violent video games. This has led   (and  ) to blame violent games for real-life violence.  Some studies have indeed found that, in lab settings, people can become more aggressive after playing violent games. Some have also found that people who play violent games are more likely to commit violent acts in real life. But it'd be just as easy to conclude  On the whole, the evidence is decidedly mixed. Here's a look at what we know — and what we don't know — about the link between video games and violence.   
 (Photo by Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images) The main evidence for the link between video games and violence is found in Some studies have also indicated that playing violent games might reduce gamers' self-control. One  , for example, found that people who played  were more likely to cheat in a raffle and commit aggressive acts toward other gamers (specifically, blasting them with loud noises through headphones) afterward, compared to those who played a pinball or mini-golf game. " At the same time,  Additionally, these studies mainly focus on a subset of video games. J , for instance,   
 (Photo by Cate Gillon/Getty Images) In addition to lab experiments, researchers have collected data on real-world gaming and the prevalence of violence. And some studies have found One   of residents of a juvenile delinquency facility in Pennsylvania, for instance, found that those who played violent games multiple times per week were more likely to have attacked someone or gotten into a fight.   other studies have come to similar conclusions. However, still other studies have failed to turn up any positive link between violent gaming and real-world violence. A   of youth in Texas found no association between those who played violent games and those who engaged in violent acts or expressed extreme aggression in interviews. Instead, the strongest predictors of violence and aggression were exposure to family violence and antisocial personality traits. Additionally, even for the studies that do show a correlation between violent games and violent deeds, the finding could easily be phrased in the opposite direction: that  Christopher Ferguson, a psychiatrist and lead author of the Texas study.   
 (Photo by Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images) Forty years ago, video games were largely nonviolent and  , and  If violent games really did make gamers more likely to commit violent acts, you'd expect to see an epidemic of youth violence in countries where gaming is popular. And yet that's the opposite of what we've seen. "During the era in which video games soared in both popularity and violence, youth violence in the US decreased to only about 12 percent of what it was two decades ago," Ferguson says. Additionally,    have consistently declined and despite heavy media coverage,  the  . There also isn't a strong correlation between the countries where people play violent games the most and the countries where shootings most often occur. Shortly after the Newtown shooting, Vox's Max Fisher (then at the Washington Post)   with the number of gun-related murders for the world's ten biggest video game markets. As you can see, there's no correlation:   
 ( ) The fact that we don't see a correlation between video game popularity and violence — either in terms of time or geography — doesn't prove that  But the lack of correlation (along with the mixed results in both lab studies and observational research) does suggest that, if video games do provoke violence, their effect is relatively modest compared to other factors. If the US really wants to get serious about reducing its  , Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 