Why every major network wants an Olivia Pope
For  's nearly 10 million viewers, there can never be enough Pope. They make their feelings heard loud and clear every Thursday night on social media and have even carved out a new way of measuring live television, as Nielsen now counts how  . With a living, breathing successful television show on its hands, ABC and its rival networks are studying   in hopes of recapturing its success with their new fall shows. One way they're doing so is by building characters that emulate Kerry Washington's Olivia Pope.  Elizabeth McCord (Téa Leoni) is the Secretary of State in  , an altruistic academic who also has ties to shady Russians. In , Professor Annalise Keating (Viola Davis) is one of the top criminal defense lawyers in the country but has a personal life that's in shambles. In  , Katherine Heigl plays CIA analyst Charlie Tucker, who has a special (not Olivia's kind of special) relationship with the sitting president and has to make tough decisions (i.e. killing FBI-wanted terrorists) that bleed into her personal life. These shows all point to the fact that Pope has become one of the main standards when you go looking for commanding female characters on television. Pope is a howling maelstrom of a character. She emits a toughness that comes from deep emotional wounds. She's glamorous but has her fingerprints all over the filthiest deeds in Washington. Her morality isn't sterling, nor is it ever truly independent from her selfishness. But what underpins her character, in scene after scene, is a commitment to her own excellence, as well as a ruthlessly competitive drive to achieve that excellence. Cracking the combination and correct proportions of traits that make Pope appealing is difficult. It even took   a while to find just the right mix. That's part of the reason some of the new Olivias fall flat and sound unnatural, either too muzzled or too blunt.     
 Kerry Washington as Olivia Pope (ABC) The other reason Olivia succeeds as a character is the world that   creator Shonda Rhimes has crafted around Olivia. Rhimes's DC is equal parts frightening and flimsy. Power is carnally fetishized, and the pace stays frenetic. The women in this world are often stuck in the gilded cages of political marriages or political affairs. But Olivia Pope wasn't the first strong female character to learn how to live up to her best self in a world where women are constantly diminished, even in recent memory. Bailey, Florrick, Pope, and Yang thrive in male-dominated worlds, where their sexuality — from whom they're sleeping with to questions about   — and gender are constant points of conflict. Each one has had to learn how to play by the rules, make her own odds, and maneuver in this space. The shows these characters star in prod at and highlight the fickle double standards these women have to face. And that's a subject that's constantly relevant in our own world.   
 (ABC) These new Olivias are popping up around two years after   premiered in 2012.  ," 2012 was also the same year that Lena Dunham's   premiered. While Slaughter was talking to young women, showing them harsh truths and speaking with a wisdom gleaned from years of experience, Dunham was deeply invested in showing us a fatalistic view of young women who can't have anything. Olivia Pope offers a different option. She's fully aware of not being to able to have it all. (In her case, the stakes are soapier, since "having it all" involves sleeping with the president.) Instead, Olivia shows us that there's nothing wrong with trying to have everything that she can. This idea of not having it all isn't the only cultural conversation we're having. A.O. Scott wrote an excellent piece in the New York Times Magazine last week, theorizing on the death of the patriarchy and adulthood.   is one of the shows he points to as a creative response to the glum  When you look beyond the gloomy-man, angry-man, antihero dramas that too many critics reflexively identify as quality television — House of Cards, Game of Thrones, True Detective, Boardwalk Empire, The Newsroom — you find genre-twisting shows about women and girls in all kinds of places and circumstances, from Brooklyn to prison to the White House. The creative forces behind these programs are often women who have built up the muscle and the résumés to do what they want. Grantland's Mark Harris had similar feelings,  , about a defining moment for television dramas and how women like Pope are a crucial part of this: This year did not mark the last gasp of the golden age, but instead a redefinition and re-gendering of what great television drama can be. It can be on a network. It can manipulate forms as dowdy and unrevered as the weekly procedural or the prime-time soap melodrama. And it can star women.   
 (ABC) Even if the reason — ratings — isn't intrinsically pure, there is something heartening and affirming about networks realizing that female characters are crucial. As my colleague Todd VanDerWerff   's success has spurred ABC to invest in shows that offer more diverse portrayals of the American public. Maybe that will work. Maybe Olivia Pope's greatest victory will be spurring networks into investing in shows centered on female characters and believing they can be both ratings and critical sensations — even if the shows they make aren't very good, like this year's batch of copycats. All of these shows, one ( ) from Rhimes's own production company, no less, struggle with how to build upon the ground   broke, and they sometimes blunder badly. As for Olivia herself, it'll be fun to see where Rhimes takes her this season and what kind of role Olivia plays, particularly after a third season that seemed to push those questions as far as they could go. We know that Pope can be a great mirror, reflecting a frustration of women's professional lives from the real world. Where else can Rhimes push her — and the conversation?   
 NBC/ABC/CBS Katherine Heigl As a valued CIA analyst, Tucker has an important job that has massive implications for the government. She, like Pope, has good outfits and surrounds herself with a team that likes to talk about serious things (like murder) with laughs interspersed. The show also seems to really want to get across that Tucker can have casual sex and drink and still be the best CIA analyst in the biz. Tucker seems more interested in talking a big game than actually making the big sweeping moves that Pope does. Téa Leoni McCord is a high-powered woman in Washington who assumes the office of Secretary of State. Her predecessor's death seems shadowy — maybe  's secret ops division B-613 had a hand in it. The show constantly reminds us that McCord is not stylish. McCord also doesn't have the crack team of gladiators that Pope has. Instead, McCord has what seems like a solid marriage. One of her two children is even likable. Viola Davis Keating is one of the best criminal defense attorneys in the game. She deals with murderers, has a complicated love life, and has a pair of assistants who don't get along. She also, like Pope, is a woman of color in a world where women of color are hardly ever seen. Also, like  , the show is constantly reminding us that it's pretty  . Keating (so far) doesn't seem to be the string-puller that Pope is. There is no big bad force like the government (yet). Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 