Matt Damon might be Bourne again
On Monday,   reported that Damon, one of the few actors who doesn't have a part in an Avengers movie or Justice League movie yet, is in discussions to appear in a fourth Bourne movie (the fifth in the franchise). The motivating factor is director Paul Greengrass ( ), who is in talks to direct the film. "I'm told that the studio is so bullish on this that the intention is to make the reteam the next   film to go into production, to make the July 16, 2016, release slot that Universal had previously assigned to an untitled   film,"  's Mike Fleming Jr. wrote. This, no doubt, is a big win for the fans that helped each Damon-starring   film gross   domestically. And the success of smaller action films like  and the critical acclaim of a sci-fi flick like show that you don't need to be Marvel, DC, or a   spinoff to do well in the blockbuster world — good news for Universal. Damon going back to  is also monumental for reasons that don't revolve around money. There are many fans whose beloved franchises ended ages ago, and Damon's  -again revolution could give them hope that a long-dead franchise could come back. Like these ones:     
 Sarah Michelle Gellar as Buffy (Buffy the Vampire Slayer)  was put to sleep after seven seasons. During the show's golden days, it was continually snubbed by the Emmys for the top categories despite being one of the most powerful (gay rights, school shootings, and death were all explored) and thoughtful shows on television. Now that it's long dead, the show, wacky monsters and all, has been regarded as a television gem, with well-respected names in the industry like   creator  Even though Sarah Michelle Gellar was the star of that show and even though she isn't doing anything great at the moment, the key here is creator Joss Whedon. And the   director is pretty much wrapped up in all things Marvel at the moment. Well,  wanted to start a solo career and is now on the precipice of world domination. Her fellow bandmates, Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams, haven't had the same type of success — the biggest highlight for the two was being called from their ho-hum lives to perform at the 2013 Super Bowl.  Beyoncé. This adaptation of the first book of Philip Pullman's   trilogy, was panned, scoring a   on Rotten Tomatoes. It was also, at the time, one of the most expensive movies New Line had ever made with a production  . The movie only grossed   domestically. It also featured a  that was really terrifying. Every single person who saw the first movie, and they'd also have to bring three of their friends. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 