Shonda Rhimes isn't an angry black woman and neither are her characters
"Ms. Rhimes has embraced the trite but persistent caricature of the Angry Black Woman, recast it in her own image and made it enviable," Stanley wrote. "Ms. Rhimes started small with Bailey, a secondary character, not a star; moved on to the charismatic best friend Dr. Naomi Bennett on  , now canceled; and then went big with Olivia. Now she is shooting the moon with Annalise [Keating]." Putting the condescending race-splaining aside for just one moment, there's a huge problem with Stanley's assessment of Keating (Viola Davis), the star of   Shonda Rhimes isn't the creator of the show. The creator of the show is a man named Pete Nowalk (who has written and produced on Rhimes's shows in the past), as Rhimes pointed out on Twitter: Confused why   critic doesn't know identity of CREATOR of show she's reviewing.   did u know u were "an angry black woman"? Apparently we can be "angry black women" together, because I didn't know I was one either!    
 
 Rhimes is one of the producers of  to be sure But  , as creator, will be instrumental in determining the direction of the show. It's also strange that creator is spotlighted in the title of Stanley's article, but This producer vs. creator jumble isn't Stanley's only oversight. Her main argument is that Rhimes's characters (along with one who isn't hers), are often black with "potent libidos" and "haughty members of society" who get angry. She then lists off two characters Rhimes has had a hand in creating: Bailey (Chandra Wilson) on   and Olivia Pope (Kerry Washington) on  . It's true, those characters get angry, but they also experience many other emotions. If you've ever tuned into a Shonda Rhimes show, you'll know that   her characters get angry and any one of those characters is, at any moment, prone to a monologue.  Wait. I'm" angry" AND a ROMANCE WRITER?!! I'm going to need to put down the internet and go dance this one out. Because ish is getting real. 
 
 Final thing: (then I am gonna do some yoga): how come I am not "an angry black woman" the many times Meredith (or Addison!) rants?  People of all races get angry on TV, because it makes for good drama. By being so reductive about Shonda Rhimes's multi-faceted career, Stanley blatantly ignores many scenes like this one from  , which feature the main character of the show being angry and, well, white: : The New York Times public editor has stated that she will personally ask about the piece. More specifically, she'll be asking what the editing process was like and how a piece like Stanley's made it into the paper. "Intended to be in praise of Ms. Rhimes, it delivered that message in a condescending way that was - at best - astonishingly tone-deaf and out of touch," Margaret Sullivan wrote  . Sullivan said she would be asking Alessandra Stanley, as well as culture editor Danielle Mattoon and executive editor Dean Baquet for comment. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 