10 tips for a happy life, according to Pope Francis
Earlier this year, Pope Francis outlined a ten-point plan for happiness. The Top 10 list appeared in an interview for the Argentine magazine , which was released to celebrate Francis' first 500 days in office. As the   reports, Francis was interviewed by Pablo Calvo, "an old acquaintance" of his, which added a familiar and off-the-cuff quality to the interview. Calvo also noted that Francis rarely referenced God during their 77-minute conversation. Here are Francis' 10 steps for a happy, healthy life. The first step to peace and happiness, said Francis, is following the ancient advice of the Romans:  This advice isn't surprising coming from Francis, who has often admonished Catholic ministers and laypersons alike to live charitably toward all. Some of Francis' most well-known comments have to do with his philosophy of economics, which places a special emphasis or "preference" on the poor. Francis also thinks charity extends beyond money, and includes giving one's time to someone who needs it. No matter how it's done, Francis advises against withdrawing into oneself, since that runs the risk of stagnation. And as he put is, " For his third bit of advice, Francis cited the novel  "Consumerism has brought us many anxieties," said Francis, who has often spoken out against what he sees as the negative effects of capitalism. Francis said that in Argentina, he'd often take mothers off guard by asking them how often they played with their children. It's hard to make time to play, and to enjoy art and literature, but "it must be done," he said. This advice echoes a passage from his book  : "people who work must take the time to relax, to be with their families, to enjoy themselves, read, listen to music, play a sport." Following up on #4, Francis said that once a week, people should take a break from their work lives to spend time with their families. Francis has often spoken highly of the family unit. For example, in a  , he said the concept of family is "necessary for the survival of humanity." Although Francis has gone on record saying that marriage in a religious sense is limited to heterosexuals, he has also   that he is   to considering non-traditional forms of marriage. The concept of resting once a week from work is an important one in both Jewish and Christian theology, and is actually one of the  . This one isn't surprising, either. Francis has discussed   before in homilies. And according to the  , he is currently working on various writings about ecology that will "draw attention to the connection between environmental problems and poverty." In one of his more provocative turns of phrase during his interview with Calvo, Francis had this to say about our "degradation" of the environment: "Isn't humanity committing suicide with this indiscriminate and tyrannical use of nature?" Francis made headlines earlier this year for including a curious word choice in his first apostolic exhortation,  . In paragraph 85  , "One of the more serious temptations which stifles boldness and zeal is a defeatism which turns us into querulous and disillusioned pessimists,  ." Instead of talking about others who frustrate us, Francis advises that it's healthy to let negative things pass quickly and quietly. Yes, you read that right. Francis' recipe for happiness includes cooling it with the aggressive conversion tactics. "The worst thing of all is religious proselytism, which paralyzes," he said. To Francis, we shouldn't talk with others with the sole goal of persuading them that we're right. Each person, he said, sees the world in his or her own way, and that should be respected. Besides, he thinks that ultimately people will join the Catholic Church if they are attracted to it, not if they are argued into it. Francis hasn't shied away from commenting on international crises. Earlier this week, while addressing the conflict in the Middle East, Francis put out an impassioned   for the violence to stop: "I ask you with all my heart, it's time to stop. Stop, please!" In the past, he's also   for those displaced by conflict, and praised those countries, like  , who have taken steps to make things easier for refugees. Francis said that working for peace must be proactive, and never quiet:  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 