7 reasons why you should care about The Good Wife
Tonight,   will return for its sixth season. We've seen the season premiere, and it kicks off what looks to be another stellar season of the best drama on network television. For some silly reasons — it's a show your parents probably watch, or the Eliot Spitzer cheating scandal is so six years ago, or you have some aversion to CBS — it'll likely be criminally under-watched again this season (the show averages around   viewers, about half of  's viewership).   
 (CBS)  is not an easy binge. Each season consists of 22 episodes, and at 40-plus minutes apiece, a rapid-fire viewing of every episode could eat up all your free time for a couple of weeks. Couple that with creators Robert and Michelle King's penchant for world-building and long-term payoffs, and you have a show that can feel impenetrable for new viewers. But there's never been a better time to hop onboard   than right now. The Kings did something drastic and different in the fifth season — they burned their show to the ground.  In the hands of any other writing team, the move could have been unsustainable or might have felt like cheating. But the Kings managed to keep control over the plotline and had everyone — new viewers and old — on the same uncertain and curious plane when it came to what was going to happen next. Sundays have become a logjam of good television. And this year is no different. This spring will see the second half of  's final season and the fifth season of HBO's  And there's good TV on Sundays in the winter, too, including mainstays  ,   and  .    
 (CBS) Age isn't good to television shows. Whether high-brow or low-brow, shows have their edges dulled by being on the air for long periods of time. It's hard to maintain quality after five years. And for a while, it looked like   might suffer the same fate as many other shows that have run too long.  's fourth season meandered, relied too much on a plot featuring Kalinda's (Archie Panjabi) estranged husband, and never hit its stride. Aside from the Kings' scorched earth gamble, there was something else going on in  's fifth season that kept it from aging awkwardly: the show was bent on making a stark statement about the lack of privacy in modern day life. From the NSA, to election surveillance, to whistle-blowing, to bloggy journalism, to social media, and even to friends,   made a point to say that privacy is dead and show us the consequences of what happens to our lives when it withers away. Many times, these interruptions of privacy ended up costing the trust of clients, family, and friends. Making the show about privacy helped an otherwise turbulent season keep its center and feel relevant. has always been fluent in addressing our relationship with technology (it's tackled the likes of Bitcoin and Google algorithms), so tackling the NSA and how dependent we are on our smartphones was a natural step. That it gave a terrific season a thematic focus ended up being the best kind of bonus. Just take a look at the first 10 minutes of tonight's premiere (directed by co-creator Robert King) to see how wonderfully visual this show can be. It begins with a series of very still shots, actors seemingly frozen in place like exhibits in a wax museum. And then, with a question to Alicia that kicks off the season, the camera begins to move, gliding between people and storylines, building connections that pay off throughout the hour and foreshadowing things that will happen in ways that register subconsciously before they work their way into the show's storytelling. And pay attention to the way the show uses the visual motif of lines on the floor — and who is and isn't able to cross them. TV is still primarily a writer's medium — and  , with its thoughtful, wry dialogue, is a wonderfully written show — but the medium's direction has gotten more and more daring in recent years, and   has been right at the forefront of that movement. The camera is always moving, using its camera to trace the webs of money, power, and sex that tie together its fictional Chicago.   
 (CBS) In this new season of television,  —  ,  ,  , and even the dismal   —  that center on telling the stories of women and the balance between their careers and personal lives. The If there's any television character who can stand toe-to-toe with Washington's Olivia it's Margulies's Alicia. There are a lot of similarities between the two: both defend murderers, both know a bit about dating their supervisors, and both know what its like to be diminished at work because of their gender. But while Alicia doesn't have the thunderous monologues or flashy lip-quivering breakdowns that Olivia has, she has her own kind of power, suppressing her feelings in order to calmly figure out what to do next. What   does so well is reflect the current cultural conversation surrounding women and their battle (and sacrifices) for equality. Where   zigs into questions about the power women can wield in political marriages and the double standards that benefit men,  zags into discussions about polling, women voters, women and religion, and motherhood. And it does so very well. Even though it can be hugely dramatic,   always takes time for a good gag or two. We won't spoil anything from tonight's premiere, except to say that any scene featuring Eli Gold (Alan Cumming) and his daughter (Sarah Steele) is pure, comic gold.   
 (CBS) From the infuriating Louis Canning (Michael J. Fox) to the lovable Elsbeth Tascioni (Carrie Preston), there is no show on television with better guest stars. In fact,  's President Fitz (Tony Goldwyn), Rowan Pope (Joe Morton), and Sally Langton (Kate Burton) have all played someone on  And basically everyone (outside of Kevin Spacey and Robin Wright) on   is part of the  family:   
 The Good Wife  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 