Laguna Beach turns 10 this week. Let's appreciate its dumb, enduring brilliance
There was the stiff, dead behind the eyes Lauren Conrad (LC) who eventually blossomed when given her own show. Stephen Colletti was the pillow-lipped object of Conrad's affection. Standing in the way of their love was the maleficent countess of Laguna, Kristin Cavallari, with her pristine, sandy blonde locks, her craggy Southern California surfer speak (ste-VAHN), and her mutant ability to cut people down with a fake laugh. There were also a few supporting teens, like Lo, a voice of reason for the mumble-mouthed LC, or Morgan, who actually read her rejection letter from BYU, the only college she applied to, out loud on cable  television:   
 Morgan has a bad day during Laguna Beach season 1, episode 2 (MTV) Some way, somehow, the show achieved a following and would change the texture of television — reality, scripted, and scripted reality — altogether. Here are seven shows that either inspired or were inspired by : This soapy teenage drama is the reason Laguna Beach was made and, accidentally, the reason we have so many reality shows about idle rich people doing nothing in particular. Audiences were introduced to Orange County by   (hint: no one from Orange County calls it "The OC" because that sounds really weird, like saying The Los Angeles) and began to think of it as a wonderland of rich, broken, alcoholic, drug-abusing, good-looking, smart, mature, teenagers living off of their parents money. Orange County was intriguing to viewers.  was a stab at a "real" version of Josh Schwartz's fictionalized Orange County (hence the words in the title    ). The series did pretty well with the casting. The teens were almost as good-looking as the OC actors, and a couple of them actually did live in mansions.  was an anthology of sorts, thanks to its its rotating cast of students. When LC and the first set of characters graduated from high school, Kristin took over. And after Kristin graduated, a whole new set of characters were introduced. Eventually, the production company left Laguna Beach High School and set up camp up the road at   high school for two more seasons of the show. But the show's original stars didn't fall out of the public eye.  Like a Russian nesting doll,   created its own spinoff show called   where Port was the main character. That wasn't nearly as fun. The main crux of   was that it was supposed to be the story of Lauren Conrad. But it wasn't until  when she began opening up (and the show became more scripted), that Conrad's life became more interesting. Even then, the most riveting parts of Lauren Conrad's life were her friends, her enemies, and her bosses. One of shining beacons of realness on   was Kelly Cutrone, the head of People's Revolution PR where Conrad interned. Cutrone was introduced as a  -ish character, equal parts taskmaster and wrecking ball, who, nevertheless, came to respect Conrad. She was eventually given her own show on Bravo where she terrorized people who weren't Conrad. But   influenced more than just shows featuring its cast or the cast of its spinoffs.  was built on selling a place full of rich people and the teens who live there.   had the same premise, just applied to the incredibly rich of New York. As much as the show liked to sell viewers on the mystery of a person who was everywhere and updating a blog, the real beauty of that show was the campy acting, the mean girl dynamics (which often seemed like a hat tip to  's Kristin) and the blunt, even mordant, perspective on class and status.   
 Chilli from TLC helps Allison get dressed in season 1, episode 1 (MTV)  became an appetizer for  ,  a reality show that regularly showcased teenagers spending five-to-six figures on lavish birthday parties. Of course, there was nowhere to go but down from this point, and now we have the  franchise. The main problem with  is that Laguna Beach High School would not allow producers to film there. In addition, the cast members were too young to live on their own or go have a drink. That's a recipe for some aggressively non-riveting television. As a solution, we'd often see the cast at the beach, at someone's house party, or at a restaurant that got some nice product placement out of it. At least this provided some nice visual opportunities. Bravo leaped on this by going after OC moms and housewives from Coto de Caza, a second tier Orange County town. In these housewives, Bravo found people old enough to drink, yet materialistic enough to be teenage catty on cable television. And, lo, an entire franchise of reality television was born.  was excellent at selling a stereotype.   perfected that formula when it brought us Ronnie, Snooki, The Situation, Sammi, JWoww, Vinnie, and Pauly D. They were as Italian and flashy as the   kids were blonde and rich, and their show would go on, unexpectedly, to be one of the biggest hits in MTV history. The characters of   were more fully realized, but also more of a punchline than the   kids were. There was a sense of aspiration with the   kids that was absent from  where many of the series' fans were tuning in just to see how messy these people could be. died so   could live.   is what happens when you have parents (or just one) who want nothing more than to take full advantage of the   format and get their kids on TV. The conversations on   — boys, shopping, boys, cars, parents being dumb, boys, questioning something obvious like the color of the sky and asking an idiotic question about it — as well as the episodic format — the narrator explains something, then the characters meet at a restaurant or the mall — are the same plot devices used on LC and company a decade ago. But where   only lasted three seasons (and two more in its    iteration),   has proved remarkably resilient, somehow running for nine seasons and counting. The   format could last for just as long as any other TV show — it just took complete shamelessness and an audience appetite for the banal. And if the original couldn't quite get there, well, Bravo and E! were only too happy to swoop in. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 