Remember when legal marijuana was going to send crime skyrocketing?
The city is now home to more than 62 percent of all Colorado recreational marijuana retailers, who cashed in on   in January alone. One California sheriff   to warn that, as a result of marijuana in his county, "thugs put on masks, they come to your house, they kick  in your door. They point guns at you and say, 'Give me your marijuana,  give me your money.'" "We had folks, kind of doomsayers, saying, 'Oh my gosh, we're going  to have riots in the streets the day they open,'" Denver City Council  President Mary Beth Susman, a supporter of legal marijuana, says. "But  it was so quiet." Denver's  So far, city data shows no increase in property  crime. Compared to the first two months of 2013, property crime in  January and February actually dropped by 12.1 percent. Reports of  robberies and stolen property dropped by 6.2 percent and 13 percent,  respectively. Burglaries and criminal mischief to property rose by only  0.5 percent. Denver residents don't seem especially concerned with the issue,  either. Susman recalls a recent community meeting she held with senior  citizens: when she asked if the crowd wanted her to talk about  marijuana, people told her they were tired of hearing about the issue. "Based on my general understanding in my district, it is becoming ho-hum," Susman says. Recreational sales began in January. Theo Stroomer / Getty Images News Some groups caution that it's too early to tell whether legalization will cause public safety issues in the long term. "We quite frankly don't know," Smart Colorado spokesperson Henny  Lasley says. Her group, formed after legalization, focuses on keeping marijuana away from children. "We've had three complete months of retail marijuana. We  were getting those questions three days into legalization. It's a pretty  short window." "This is a great opportunity for us to find out what happens when you  legalize a substance like marijuana," Gorman says. "Just wait and watch  what happens in these labs, and then you can make a decision based on  data and facts and not rhetoric." Some marijuana legalization opponents, on the other hand, have  adopted a softer opinion. Denver Mayor Michael Hancock, who opposed  legalization,   that the city's dive into recreational marijuana went smoothly. And  despite some concerns about property crime, he said the city saw  "nothing that has raised a major red flag." Medical marijuana in California. Justin Sullivan / Getty Images News Outside of Colorado, most research on crime and marijuana looks at legalization for medicinal purposes.   published in PLOS ONE concluded the expansion of medical marijuana did not lead to more violent or property crime, and   legalization might in fact correlate with a reduction in some crimes. Researcher Robert Morris suggests that taking marijuana purchases out of an illicit market could reduce crime overall. "Perhaps there's additional crime associated with the criminal  marketplace to begin with," he says. Alternatively, crime could decrease if people began substituting alcohol with marijuana. "We know there's a  pretty strong link between alcohol misuse and crime, particularly in a  person of violence," Morris says. "There's not as much of a correlation  between marijuana use and crimes." Still, Morris cautions that the potential for crime reduction needs  more study. He also says the findings don't necessarily apply to full  marijuana legalization, and he would like to study that issue in further  detail. People celebrating 4/20 in Denver. Marc Piscotty / Getty Images News If there's a reason for crime to increase following marijuana  legalization, it may be the fine line marijuana businesses walk between  legalization at the state level and criminality at the federal level. Many banks decline to open accounts for marijuana sellers since the  federal government still considers the drug illegal. As a result, many  marijuana businesses hold raw cash — sometimes tens of thousands of  dollars — from profits and to pay their bills. (The Obama  administration, for its part,   telling prosecutors and regulators to prioritize issues other than marijuana in states where the drug is legal. But banks   without changes in the law itself.) Keeping cash on hand can be dangerous; a large stash of bills can be an easy target for crime.   from researchers at the University of Missouri at St. Louis and Georgia State University found raw cash in welfare programs can lead to higher crime rates due to its liquidity and anonymity in  transactions. Researchers found that Missouri counties that moved to electronic welfare benefits, from cash, saw crime drop by nearly 10 percent following the transition. Denver District Attorney Morrissey says the  amount of cash at marijuana businesses will near certainly lead to more crime.  "You hit a 7-Eleven in Denver, you might get $20 to $100," he said in an interview. "You hit a dispensary on a good day, who knows? You might get $30,000 in cash." City Council President Susman also worries the large amount of cash  flowing in and out of these businesses could become an easy target for  criminals. "A grow operation will have a $20,000 or $30,000 utility bill a  month," she says. "They have to show up at the utility's office with  $20,000 or $30,000 in a briefcase." Some cities aren't resisting this offer. Chris Hondros / Getty Images News If Denver's experience holds true, the transition — at least for the first few months — should go smoothly. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 