The civil rights legacy of Eric Holder
US Attorney General Eric Holder   from his position as the head of the Justice Department, staying on only until a successor is named. As Holder departs, he leaves behind a civil rights legacy that includes some of the broadest steps in recent decades to dismantle — or at least lessen — the racial disparities in America's criminal justice system. The reforms tackled major issues  . These issues Holder has weathered controversy after controversy during his tenure: his   of national security and surveillance issues, his   to try 9/11 plotters like Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in New York City, and his   to prosecute big banks. Then there was the controversy surrounding  , a sting operation in which, as the   explained, federal officials "purposely allowed licensed firearms dealers to sell weapons to illegal  straw buyers, hoping to track the guns to Mexican drug cartel leaders  and arrest them." But, as Politico's Glenn Thrush wrote in  , there's a simple reason why President Barack Obama has stood behind him: "Holder has been willing to say the things Obama couldn't or wouldn't say about race." Some of these comments about race were made at great political risk, often inspiring ire from opponents and right-wing talking heads. In 2009 conservatives like   criticized Holder for a Black History Month speech in with the attorney general called the US a "nation of cowards" for failing to seriously confront its history of racism. Holder stood by his remarks. "I wouldn't walk away from that speech," Holder told   in July. "I think we are still a nation that is too afraid to confront racial issues," rarely engaging "one another across the color line [to] talk about racial issues." Although Holder's candor earned him criticism, it built a legacy that attracted massive support among minority groups.   of   captured the sentiment in  : " After the war on drugs began in the 1970s, the US dramatically increased the number of people it put in jail and prison,  ( ) Under Holder, the Department of Justice and the Obama administration have taken several steps to undo that recent history of mass incarceration. The most significant changes come through sentencing   for nonviolent drug offenders. In August 2013 Holder issued   instructing federal prosecutors to avoid triggering mandatory minimum sentences for certain nonviolent drug offenders, asking them to be selective about what information they include when charging an offender of a crime. In March 2014 Holder issued new requirements for  , requiring them to provide more resources and support for nonviolent drug offenders — in hopes of offering an alternative or stopgap to imprisonment. These reforms reflect the stark costs and failures of mass incarceration and the war on drugs, in many ways. But Holder never held back in characterizing them as race issues. ( ) "Right now, unwarranted disparities are far too common," Holder said in  . "As President Obama said last month, it’s time to ask tough questions about how we can strengthen our communities, support young people, and address the fact that young black and Latino men are disproportionately likely to become involved in our criminal justice system — as victims as well as perpetrators."   
 US Attorney General Eric Holder testifies before Congress. (Chip Somodevilla / Getty Images News) Beyond sentencing reforms, Holder oversaw some of   in the war on drugs since former President Richard Nixon and Congress launched the sweeping anti-drug effort in the 1970s. While previous administrations often touted federal laws to shut down   dispensaries that are legal at the state level, the Obama administration drew back the crackdowns and even allowed   to carry out   without much federal interference, issuing  Most recently, Holder   whether marijuana's strict legal classification — the foundation for the war on marijuana at the federal level — is justified and whether pot really belongs in the same legal category as heroin. "I think it's certainly a question that we need to ask ourselves —  whether or not marijuana is as serious a drug as is heroin," Holder  said in an interview with  . "[T]he question of whether or not they should be in the same  category is something that I think we need to ask ourselves and use  science as the basis for making that determination." Holder saw these reforms as a civil rights issue, noting the disproportionate rates at which black and Hispanic Americans were punished for marijuana-related crimes despite using the drug at roughly the same rate as white people. "[Y]ou see the disproportionate impact on communities of color, especially when you see that drug usage among African Americans, Hispanics is roughly the same as whites, and yet you see Hispanics and African Americans going to jail for far longer and a much greater rate," Holder told Yahoo News. "It's a civil rights issue, and one that I'm determined to confront as long as I'm attorney general."   
 Police officers watch over demonstrators in Ferguson, Missouri. (Scott Olson / Getty Images News) Following the August 9 shooting of   and  , that followed, Holder's Justice Department   an investigation of the entire Ferguson Police Department and unveiled initiatives to help local governments in St. Louis County confront their  . "The Department of Justice is working across the nation to ensure  that the criminal justice system is fair, constitutional, and free of  bias," Holder said in  . "Ferguson and  St. Louis County are not the first places that we have become engaged to  ensure fair and equitable policing and they will not be the last. The  Department of Justice will continue to work tirelessly to ensure that  the Constitution has meaning for all communities." Holder's involvement in Ferguson wasn't unique for the attorney general. Holder has overseen more than twice as  many civil rights investigations on police departments than his  predecessor did in a similar time period. He even   against New York City's stop-and-frisk policy, which gained   for its disproportionate effect on black and Latino residents. The civil rights investigations have clear goals: to systemically address the disparities in police treatment faced by white and non-white civilians and send a signal that such disparities are unacceptable in the eyes of the Justice Department.   
 For Holder, his pursuit may reflect his own experiences with law enforcement. "I was a young college student driving from New York to Washington,  stopped on a highway and told to open the trunk of my car, because the  police officer told me he wanted to search it for weapons," he told  . "I remember as I got back in the car and continued on my  journey how humiliated I felt, how angry I got." Through his position, Holder was given the opportunity to address that humiliation he and other minority Americans face every day, and he often called on the nation to follow him. "Will we again turn a blind eye to the hard truths that Ferguson exposed, burying these tough realities until another tragedy arises to set them off like a powder keg?" Holder asked in   at New York University. "Or will we finally accept this mandate for open and honest dialogue, reach for new and innovative solutions, and rise to the historic challenge — and the critical opportunity — now right before us?"   
 US Attorney General Eric Holder speaks to reporters. (Mark Wilson / Getty Images News) Despite the changes under Holder, advocates and experts generally agree much more will need to be done to repair the disparities in the justice system. Some drug policy experts, for instance, say the dismantlement of   should go further — through   and  . The states taking on relaxed marijuana policies still face   in areas ranging from banking to taxes due to federal policies. "While it's nice to see Holder making these statements and we applaud the reforms that he has effected during his time in office, I wish he had done more within his term to directly address these problems," said retired Baltimore Police Major Neill Franklin, executive director of Law Enforcement Against Prohibition, in a statement. "I am hopeful his successor will recognize the war on drugs for what it is: the single biggest problem afflicting our criminal justice system and the central civil rights issue of our time." Pointing to the 2013 slowdown in the fall of the imprisonment rate, some criminal justice experts   the US needs reforms that address the long, disproportionate sentences of violent offenders as well. "The states need to be more ambitious at the types of reform they're   passing to reduce the population," said Brian Elderbroom, a senior  research associate at the Urban Institute's Justice Policy Center, in  . "The  lesson here is there's a lot more work to be done." But it's unquestionable that Holder made significant strides just by bringing the issue of racial disparities in the criminal justice system to the mainstream. For the Americans who are disproportionately affected by the policies he has tried to fix, it was refreshing just to hear someone of his rank acknowledge the massive racial gaps in prisons, policing, and the war on drugs. According to  , Reverend Al Sharpton    in this way at a press conference Thursday: "If he is resigning, the civil rights community has lost the most effective attorney general on civil rights in the history of this country." 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 