Congress can make drug sentences shorter in zero easy steps
Congress is extremely good at doing nothing. And if lawmakers can just keep that up for six more months, that could reduce the sentences of thousands of drug offenders who are currently in federal prisons. Here's how that could happen. When someone is convicted of a federal crime, there are two different sets of rules that determine how long his sentence should be. First, there are "mandatory minimums" laws passed by Congress. If a suspect is convicted of a crime that Congress has set a minimum sentence length for, then, with very rare exceptions, he gets a sentence at least that long. The judge can't go any lower. But what if Congress   set a mandatory minimum sentence for the crime? Or what if the judge thinks the defendant deserves to serve   time than the bare minimum? Then the judge turns to the other set of federal sentencing rules: the  .  These guidelines use a complicated formula to spit out a recommended range for the length of the sentence; the judge then picks a sentence length within that range that seems fair. Here's how the Commission wants to change things. There's a table in the sentencing guidelines   that lists quantities of various drugs on one side, and the "base offense level" that quantity means for the sentencing formula in the other. (The more serious the crime, the higher the "base level," and the longer the recommended sentence.) The guidelines haven't officially changed yet, though. On April 30th, the Sentencing Commission   the changes it wants to make. If Congress wants to  the guidelines, it has to take action within the next six months to officially "disapprove" them. If Congress has no problem with the guidelines, or if lawmakers just don't take action in the next six months, the   will go into effect on November 1st. No one knows for sure whether Congress likes the proposed changes or not. And in theory, if both parties really don't want to reduce drug sentencing, they could unite and pass a "disapproval" this summer or fall. But given that bipartisan groups in both the  and the   are working to reduce drug sentences on the Congressional end — by reducing mandatory minimums — it doesn't seem like there's a bipartisan desire to block the new guidelines. And besides,   — much less during the months when most of them will be busy campaigning for reelection? The real open question now, though, isn't something Congress has any control over: will the new guidelines apply to people   in prison — or just new prisoners? The Sentencing Commission will be holding a series of public hearings in June on the question, and has posted the guidelines for "public comment." (Instructions for public comments are  ; comments should be sent to  .) It may take them several months to make their decision. In the meantime, Congress is probably going to do what Congress does best: nothing. And that would likely mean lower drug sentences for people convicted of drug offenses going forward. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 