Rapist who got 1 month because victim "seemed older" than 14 gets new, longer sentence
Last year, Montana teacher Stacey Dean Rambold was convicted of "sexual intercourse without consent" for raping a 14-year-old student who later committed suicide. But he only had to spend a month in prison for the crime, thanks to a judge who blamed his victim for getting raped — saying the victim "seemed older than her chronological age" and that she could have been "just as much in control" as her rapist. The case spurred a national outcry, and this week, Montana tried again. This time, Rambold got  Most of the time, sentencing someone twice because he didn't spend enough time in jail the first time around would be unconstitutional. But because the judge actually violated Montana law when he sentenced Rambold last year, the case had to go through sentencing again. Meanwhile, the judge who issued the lenient sentence last year has been censured, but his only punishment is essentially that he has to retire a month early. Here's how the Rambold case developed: Rambold   Cherice Moralez, a 14-year-old student of his. Moralez tells another teenager in her church group about the rape. When the friend tells Moralez' mother, she  . Rambold is charged by Yellowstone County prosecutors with three counts of sexual intercourse without consent. Moralez kills herself two weeks before her 17th birthday. According to  , Moralez had been "ostracized and bullied" after word had gotten out about the rape. Prosecutors think it will be   and convict him now that his victim won't be able to testify against him. So they offer him an agreement: if he completes a three-year counseling program for sex offenders without violating any of the program's requirements, they'll dismiss the charges. Rambold accepts the agreement and enters the counseling program. Rambold violates the terms of the program. In keeping with the agreement, prosecutors   against Rambold for his rape of Moralez. Rambold pleads guilty to one count of sexual intercourse without consent. (In return, prosecutors   the other two counts.) Judge G. Todd Baugh sentences Rambold to 15 years in prison, with all but one month of that time suspended. That means Rambold will have to serve only a month in prison, then register as a sex offender and stay on   until 2028 — and as long as he doesn't violate the terms of his probation, he'll never have to go back to prison. In his ruling, Judge Baugh says that Moralez "seemed older than her chronological age," and speculated that she was "probably as much in control of the situation as the defendant was." Baugh will later   for his remarks, calling them "stupid and wrong." He'll admit that "of course a 14-year-old can't consent" but  , "it wasn't this forcible beat-up rape." He'll also  ,  Judge Baugh's sentence, and especially his remarks, generate  and outrage around the country. A  calling on Baugh to resign gets  The Yellowstone County prosecutor's office   to the Montana attorney general appealing Judge Baugh's sentence, and asking for the state Supreme Court to review it. They point out that under Montana   laws, prison sentences for the crime Rambold committed can't be any shorter than 2 years. They argue that even though Rambold was technically sentenced to 15 years, the fact that he'll only have to serve a month of that sentence before released violates the Montana law. Judge Baugh agrees that his sentence might have been illegal, and   in Rambold's case. But the   tells Baugh that it's definitely illegal for him to just hold another hearing to change the sentence. Instead, the Supreme Court agrees to take the prosecutors' appeal. The   that Judge Baugh's sentence was in fact illegal, and tells another lower-court judge to issue a new sentence that complies with the two-year minimum. Judge Baugh is officially   by the State Supreme Court for his handling of the case. He's issued a 31-day suspension, to be served at the end of 2014. Since Judge Baugh has already announced his plans to retire at the end of 2014, this just pushes up his last day of work.  Rambold's attorneys try to get the new judge, Randal Spaulding, to agree to give Rambold the minimum prison term of two years. But Spaulding gives Rambold another   — meaning that Rambold will serve ten years in prison, and spend another five on probation. Spaulding acknowledges that Rambold isn't likely to reoffend, but says that his "abuse and exploitation of his position of trust as a teacher, and specifically Cherice's teacher" justifies the longer sentence. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 