Report: Thousands didn't register to vote in Ferguson since August after all
: USA Today's   on October 7 reported that the local director of elections had miscalculated the number of Ferguson residents who signed up to vote following  . The actual number is 128, not 3,287. HUGE change in   voter registration numbers. Director of Elections now say only 128 ppl registered to vote since shooting NOT 3,287. Director of Elections says, "A discrepancy was identified in the report that provided us with the numbers we released to you last week." From Director of Elections: "After two days of meetings with the Secretary of State’s Office, we were given the correct number." Director of Elections just told me she was "flabbergasted" by the mistake but that it was a "mistake, pure and simple...no hanky-panky." Just spoke to   from secretary of state's office. She confirms that  St. Louis County Election Board pulled the wrong report. : The number of people registering to vote in Ferguson, Missouri, has skyrocketed following   — a sign the residents of the St. Louis suburb are ready for change. USA Today's     that, since the shooting, 4,839 people in St. Louis County registered to vote, and 3,287 of those people lived in Ferguson.  To put that in further perspective: 12,096 people were registered to vote in Ferguson as of April, and unopposed Mayor James Knowles won with just  . The surge in voter registrations won't necessarily translate to thousands of new votes.   cast ballots during local elections in April. But even  if 12 percent of new registrants vote, that's 400 more voters — certainly enough to impact a municipal election. The rise in registrations could reflect efforts, particularly by St. Louis committeeman Anthony Bell, to sign people up to vote during and after the height of the protests. (In August, Matt Wills, executive director of Missouri's Republican Party,   the drive "not only disgusting but completely inappropriate.") The problem, MSNBC  , is low voter turnout during local elections in March and April." No  one collects data on turnout by race in municipal elections.  But the  overall turnout numbers for Ferguson's mayoral and city council   election are discouraging," writes MSNBC's Zachary Roth. "This year,  just 12.3 percent of eligible voters  cast a ballot, according to  numbers provided by the county. In 2013 and  2012, those figures were  even lower: 11.7 percent and 8.9 percent respectively. As a  rule, the  lower the turnout, the more the electorate skews white and conservative." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 