Yes means yes: California's new sexual assault law, explained
A   by the Department of Justice   that one in five women is the victim of an attempted or completed sexual assault while in college. A The new standard comes from SB 967, nicknamed the Yes Means Yes law, which California Governor Jerry Brown signed into law on September 28. Now that it's passed, all schools that get state money for financial aid have to use what is known as an "affirmative consent standard" to decide whether a sexual assault took place.  Although this approach isn't totally new —   — California is the first to make it statewide law.   
 ( )   Before, when a student in California went to her college or university administration to report a rape, the school could evaluate what happened in any way it saw fit. Under the new law, colleges have to use a set standard to determine whether the victim provided "affirmative, conscious, and voluntary agreement to engage in sexual activity." In other words, did she either say "yes" or make it very clear that she meant "yes"?   
 ( ) It's an oversimplified way of describing the changes above and emphasizing that the law is a departure from the more common approach to sexual assault allegations, which is to ask if the alleged victim ever said "no." It would be more accurate to call it the "affirmative consent to sexual activity means consent to sexual activity" law, but that's not as catchy. Here's  The law makes clear that this type of consent can't be given by someone who is asleep or incapacitated in any way, including by drugs and alcohol. So college students who are drunk are incapable of providing the type of consent that would let their schools rule out that they were sexually assaulted. The law also says drunkenness isn't an excuse for being confused about whether you received affirmative consent from your sexual partner.  This also means that being in a relationship with someone, or having had sex with them before, is not proof of consent.   
 ( ) Yes. The sexual assault policies required by the law make no distinction between the kind of consent required by a man and the kind of consent required by a woman. In this article, "she" is used to refer to victims of sexual assault and "he" to refer to perpetrators, but that's only for simplicity and to mirror the most common facts in these cases. When deciding whether someone committed sexual assault by having sex with someone who didn't give affirmative consent, California schools now have to apply a " " standard that mirrors the lower standard of proof used in civil cases, compared to the "beyond a reasonable doubt" one used in criminal court.  These changes combine to mean that someone accused of sexual assault is much more likely to be found guilty by his college than he is by a criminal court. And what happens if the school decides he's guilty? Federal law requires colleges to punish students they deem guilty of sexual assault in some way, but it doesn't get any more specific than that. So if a school does find a student has committed sexual assault, the exact consequence will depend up on the discretion of school officials.   
 ( ) Rachel Van Cleave, dean of Golden Gate University School of Law in San Francisco, told  In other words: many sexual assaults, regardless of the legal standard at play, will require decision makers to decide which one of the only two people who were there is telling the truth. This new law doesn't change that. It simply changes the nature of topic about which the accused and accuser are testifying. In the criminal context, the question the court asks is generally "Did she say no?" In the California college campus context, that will change to "Did she say yes?"   
 ( ) The  , a men's rights organization, in anticipation of the law's passage, posted an editorial warning that the new standard would threaten the "due process rights of the accused." Other critics include those who worry, like  's Shikha Dalmia, that the law will "inevitably snag some guys who earnestly meant no harm," or are concerned that the law is impractical or will be difficult to implement,   like, "If a woman performs oral sex on a man without asking him first, and if he simply lies back and lets her, has she, by the law's definition, assaulted him?"   
 ( ) Supporters hope the new law will lessen the burden of proof for students who have been sexually assaulted, making it easier for them to ensure that their attackers are punished. Senator Kevin de Leon (D-Los Angeles), who introduced the the law,   it has "shifted the conversation regarding sexual assault to one of prevention, justice, and healing." The law also has the support of victims' rights groups, violence prevention groups, and the University of California System,  In response to critics who say the requirement of obtaining affirmative consent is impractical and interferes with the way sexual intimacy works, Ann Freidman wrote in a piece for  : "I beg to differ. Confirming consent leads to much hotter sex." Fifty-nine percent support it and just 21 percent disapprove of the law, according a  .   
 ( ) While sexual assault is a problem much bigger than colleges, there's a lot of recent interest in how to respond to what's been called an   (One in five women experienced an attempted or completed sexual assault while in college, according to a 2007   funded by the Department of Justice) This has been recognized at the highest levels of government. In May, the Department of Education announced that it was investigating   for possible violations of federal law in their handling of sex abuse claims. In September, the White House launched a campaign to prevent sexual assaults on campus. Among its   for improving sexual misconduct policies was that college sexual misconduct policies should define consent  as "voluntary agreement to engage in sexual activity." It's no surprise that against this backdrop, the California legislature took notice and passed a law that aims to change the standard at colleges. Yes. While the affirmative consent provision is by far its most controversial, the law makes other changes. For example, it requires that California student financial aid programs have policies covering the disclosure of crimes that occur on campus, training campus officials, and protecting the privacy of and providing counseling for sexual assault survivors. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 