There's no scientific test that can determine your age
Back during the Beijing Olympics in 2008, critics   members of China's gymnastics team of being below the age limit of 16. In gymnastics, being small and light can be a serious advantage, so there's some incentive to lie about age. Unfortunately,  This might seem like a weird statement, at first. After all, we can tell how old trees are by measuring their rings. But there's no comparable test for humans. If a person doesn't have their birth certificate, there's no way to reliably tell his or her age. And it's a problem that comes up quite often. For example, someone might want to know how old a person claiming retirement benefits actually is. Or want to estimate how old a crime victim was. Or figure out whether an immigrant is really a minor or not. For years, scientists tried everything they could think of — looking at growing bones, white blood cells, and so on — to verify people's ages. Nothing worked. More recently, scientists have developed something called the "epigenetic clock," which can get within plus or minus two or three years. But a more accurate test is still elusive. Here's a rundown. There are several different approaches here:  For children, the rate at which bones grow can sometimes provide a clue to age.  But   Another possibility involved telomeres — the ends of chromosomes that get shorter and shorter every time a cell divides. Some   have shown correlations between telomere length and a person's risk of developing cancer. But the length of telomeres isn't all that useful for predicting someone's age.    Another method is to examine a range of molecules in the blood, such as some amino acids, which can vary with age. A 2013   of more than 6,000 people published in the  found 22 such molecules in blood that correlated with age. It wasn't really accurate enough to get an impressive estimate of how old someone is. But it's possible that could improve with further research. Within the past few years, several papers have proposed a method that narrows the age estimate of a person even further. These researchers look at molecular markers called methyl groups that can get added or removed from DNA and help determine how your genes get used. (The study of these and similar DNA markers is called   and is currently a very new and active field of study.) It turns out that some of these methylation sites can steadily accumulate or decrease in specific ways as a person ages. This can be used as an "epigenetic clock." "I call it the clock because it is so accurate that it deserves that label," says Steve Horvath, a professor of human genetics and biostatistics at UCLA.  Likewise, in 2013, researchers published a   in   that used blood to create an age estimate. They examined the blood of 656 people aged 19 to 101 to create a model of more than 450,000 possible markers.  And two other similar models have also been published since then, in   and  , in  . But they all seem to have their limits. Zhang says that his method likely won't get much more accurate because of the natural variation that exists between people of the same age. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 