9 facts that explain why Obama is about to help millions of immigrants
President Obama is expected to announce   before the end of 2014 — and  On one level, this is the end of a process that   when the administration first announced it was reviewing deportation policy to see how it could be made more humane. On another level, though, this is another phase in the development of an immigration system that's been transformed over the last 20 years. To understand how we got to this point, it's necessary to understand why immigration policy looks so different now than it did back then.   would be an unprecedented move on Obama's part — but it is also a reaction against trends in immigration enforcement that are themselves unprecedented. The Obama administration didn't spontaneously decide to take action on immigration after Democrats got defeated in the 2014 midterm elections. Instead, the actions Obama is expected to announce soon are the culmination of a process that started in March 2014, when the administration announced it would be conducting a review of deportation policy to see if anything could be done to make it more humane. That review got   to give House Republicans one last chance to vote on a comprehensive immigration reform bill (the Senate  with 68 votes back in 2013). They did not. Once Speaker of the House John Boehner   that immigration reform was dead for the year in Congress, President Obama  that he was restarting the policy review — and was expanding it to  the administration could do to fix the immigration system. That was widely understood to include expanded protections from deportation to millions of unauthorized immigrants. For most of the 20th century, any given unauthorized immigrant wasn't at much risk of deportation. The federal government simply wasn't putting a ton of energy into enforcing immigration laws against people living in the United States (or, for that matter, patrolling the US/Mexico border). That began to change in the late 1990s, but it wasn't until after 9/11 that a separate agency was created for the purpose of immigration enforcement in the interior of the United States. As ICE was established, and kept getting more money from Congress,   — when the government was deporting roughly 400,000 immigrants a year, every year.   
 ( )   
 This is typical among law-enforcement agencies, at any level. Law enforcement officials and prosecutors get resources from the legislature, but the legislature doesn't micro-manage how those resources get spent. But the resources a law enforcement agency has are limited, so they have to decide what kinds of enforcement efforts are worth their time. After the failure of a comprehensive immigration reform plan in 2006, the Bush administration made an effort to crack down on unauthorized immigrants living in the United States. And they made sure they were doing it in high-profile ways. Instead of simply engaging in paper audits of employers to make sure they had documentation for all their workers, ICE conducted several   that resulted in the arrest and deportation of hundreds of immigrant workers. The most famous of these raids, on   resulted in 300 workers being convicted of document fraud over a few days of trials; the owner of the plant and his family weren't convicted on any charges involving employing unauthorized workers or violating labor law in how those workers were treated. Simultaneously, ICE  that deputized local police in enforcing federal immigration law — bringing the threat of deportation much closer to home for any unauthorized immigrant who might come into contact with local law enforcement, even as a victim or witness of a crime. That's the situation President Obama found as he came into office in 2009: an expanding immigration-enforcement agency that, for the last few years, had been aggressively increasing its focus on deportations. Administration officials decided that in order to pass legislative immigration reform, they   — so they needed to keep the total number of deportations rising. But they thought that they could target immigration enforcement so that immigrant families living in the United States didn't need to feel under constant threat of deportation. Essentially, they wanted to keep large-scale deportations, while assuaging the fear in immigrant communities that those numbers produced.   
 If the federal government doesn't want to spend its resources deporting someone, it basically has two options. One is, simply, not to deport them. When few resources were dedicated to deportations, that was an easy option — few unauthorized migrants came onto the government's radar in the first place. Now that ICE does have a lot of resources, deciding not to deport someone requires a deliberate action: deciding at the outset that certain classes of immigrants aren't an enforcement priority, and then sticking with that decision. The decision simply not to deport someone can be easily reversed — or simply ignored — by someone else in the bureaucracy. So to target resources systematically, the government has another option: to proactively grant someone protection from deportation. Several tools exist to do this.  . It's been used for decades, in individual cases (often when someone's already been put in court for deportation, but the government's decided not to go through with it) or with small groups of people. It's not permanent, and it doesn't make it any easier for someone to get actual legal status (which is very difficult for unauthorized immigrants, even if they'd qualify through a spouse or relative). But it's a little more certain than simply not getting deported.   
 During Obama's first term, the administration   telling federal immigration agents to go after some unauthorized immigrants (like criminals) and not others (like teenagers, or parents of US citizen children). But it   As a result, through 2011, the president was in the awkward position of claiming that his administration wasn't "rounding up students," then being confronted with a student holding her order of deportation. (I've written in detail about the Obama administration's struggles with the  , which was intended to target criminals, and the  between the administration and the Latino and immigrant-advocacy communities during Obama's first term.) There's evidence that during Obama's second term, the administration   in targeting immigration enforcement so that otherwise law abiding unauthorized workers without criminal records aren't at significant risk of deportation. But by that point, immigrants simply didn't trust the administration to be honest with them. As I   in September: Politicians can't successfully explain anything to the public if the public is already convinced it knows what's going on. And that's been the case on immigration for some time. Progressives and immigration advocates don't believe that the administration has enough control over federal agents that it can tell them which immigrants not to deport. Throughout 2011, Obama   that by trying to target enforcement resources passively, he was doing all he legally could to protect immigrant families from deportation. He said he didn't have a "magic wand" that could guarantee protection. In 2012, he changed his mind. He rolled out the   program, which allowed young unauthorized immigrants who'd come to the US as children or teenagers, and who met other requirements, to apply for deferred action and work permits.   
 Mitzi Pena, 19 (right), her sister Yaretzi Pena, 5, and her cousin Karina Terriquez, 20 (left), wait in line to receive assistance in filing out their application for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program. (Kevork Djansezian/Getty Images) After creating the DACA program, the Obama administration   that  they'd really done everything they could legally do. (Legal experts   that by any standard by which DACA is legal, larger-scale deferred action would also be legal.) But in March 2014, the administration   that they'd be reviewing deportation policies to see what could be done to make them more "humane." This was an acknowledgment that maybe they hadn't done everything they could do — implying that they were now open to the possibility of expanding deferred action to more unauthorized immigrants. Advocates for tougher immigration enforcement think it's important  to remove the threat of deportation. When pro-enforcement groups  , during its initial deportation review, one attendee said they "pushed very hard that there has to be a percentage of the resources [that] have to be for random deportations." They believe that while law enforcement agencies typically do set priorities about who to go after, they typically do a certain amount of random enforcement of the laws. M The difference between active and passive protections may matter less to proponents of strict enforcement, but it matters tremendously to immigrant-rights advocates — and immigrants themselves.   
 Oscar Hernandez speaks at an Own the Dream event (Own the Dream) Earlier iterations of prosecutorial discretion   By contrast, the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program has been a   at improving the lives of its beneficiaries. ( Advocates see the success of the DACA program as evidence that the administration has the ability to remove the threat of deportation from larger numbers of people if it really wants to. That's why they've continued to push for affirmative relief, rather than being willing to rely on administration promises about passive protection of immigrants. Unless the   are wildly wrong, it looks like the advocates' argument has been persuasive. The White House has been convinced that if it really wants to remove the fear of deportation from unauthorized immigrant residents, it's going to need to let them apply for relief themselves. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 