4 rabbis killed in attack on Jerusalem synagogue: what you need to know
    Early on Tuesday morning, two Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem stormed the Kehilat Bnei Torah synagogue, armed with meat cleavers and a gun.  Jerusalem has been ground zero for , suffused with conflict between East Jerusalemites and Israeli police. But this attack marks a major escalation in the severity of the violence. East Jerusalem's Arab residents live in a kind of limbo: they don't hold Israeli citizenship like Israeli Arabs, but they live under Israeli rather than Palestinian Authority rule. For months, and especially after the murder of a Palestinian youth by Jewish extremists in July, Arab residents have been protesting and rioting, throwing rocks at Israelis and attacking Jerusalem's light rail system. Because the West Bank is   and   by Hamas, "Jerusalem is the one place where Palestinians can stick it to Israelis," Danny Seidemann, an Israeli expert on Jerusalem, said. There riots are a largely unorganized expression of rage at Israel — and this terrorist attack marks a very dangerous escalation. There have been lethal attacks in the current Jerusalem conflict before,  . But the synagogue attack is by far the most spectacular, and it comes on the heels of the controversial death of Palestinian bus driver Yusuf al-Rumuni in West Jerusalem. Rumuni was found hung in his bus — the Israeli autopsy report concluded that he killed himself, but  . So things are bad. And they could get worse. Jerusalem is bracing for conflict. Israeli police are on high alert, prepared for a night of clashes with Palestinian youth. These attacks could easily grow out of control, creating a major conflict between Israelis and Palestinians. Even if those clashes are subdued, Israeli or Palestinian responses could further escalate the Jerusalem crisis. Israeli Prime Minister has blamed   from the Palestinian Authority leadership in recent days for inciting the attack. However, the head of the Shin Bet, Israel's FBI equivalent, has said the  . We know that Netanyahu promised to respond to the synagogue attack with a "heavy hand" — the nature of that response has yet to be announced, though Israel already detained some family members of the killers. On the Palestinian Authority side, President Mahmoud Abbas has officially condemned the attack. But Hamas officials praised it, and there are sketchy reports that the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) — a less frequently heard from militant group —has  . This rhetoric,  to say nothing of actual follow-up attacks, has the potential to escalate the conflict even further. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 