The sad and twisted comic book families that will make you appreciate your own
But humans can only eat so much, and in the time between meals, you may be required to engage in  . More often than not, these conversations turn into arguments. And those arguments can turn into wanting to walk into the ocean (while cradling a bowl of stuffing, softly spooning it into your mouth). You are not alone. Comic book writers and artists have likely felt the same way too. How else would you explain how often, in the world of comics, families are gigantic disaster piles of dysfunction. Fathers are demons, lovers become enemies, and children are reminders of the worst things in the universe. Here, then, are a few comic book families so dysfunctional they might make you more appreciative of yours:   
 (Marvel) Though it's addressed only obliquely in the film   
 Bova delivering Wanda and Pietro (Marvel)   
 (Marvel) If your sister or daughter has the power to alter reality, don't mess with her.   
 Ultron Unlimited (Marvel)  Ant-Man, the Wasp, and their "son," Ultron, are one of the most bizarre families in the Marvel Universe. They might even be the   twisted family. Ant-Man a.k.a. Hank Pym, a second-string Avenger, is basically a long-running failure of a superhero whose inventions never pan out. His wife, The Wasp, a.k.a. Janet van Dyne, is an Avengers darling who gets everything right, which causes frustration and resentment in Hank. And then there's Ultron, a creation of Hank's who turns out to one of the Avengers' greatest foes and his creator's biggest mistake. On top of all of this, Ultron has paralyzing daddy issues.  There are lots. Perhaps the most visceral fight came in . In it, Pym tries to redeem himself for his Ultron blunder by making a robot that only he can defeat. According to Pym's plan, the robot would ostensibly defeat the Avengers, and Pym would save the day. His wife finds out about the plan, urges him to stop, and then he hits her:   
 (Marvel) Though his wife has recovered, and continues to play an integral role in the Avengers, that episode tainted and still defines Pym's character. Divorce is an option, and robot children are bad ideas.     
 (DC Comics)  Bruce Wayne is, of course, Batman. Damian Wayne, whom you might not be familiar with unless you've been keeping up with the comics, is the son Bruce fathered with Talia al Ghul, a supervillain and Bruce Wayne love interest. There isn't really so much of a fight as there is a constant ongoing struggle to find common ground with one another. Because Damian's mom is a supervillain and his maternal grandfather a super criminal, his father didn't even know he existed until he was 10 years old. And because assassins trained him, Damian is a little bit damaged. His relationship with his dad is abrasive, reluctant, and peppered with friction. But they learn from each other, especially during Grant Morrison's run on  . Morrison told  : I love the idea that he was the son of Batman and the world's greatest super criminal. So part of him is a bad little dude, and the other part of him is the son of Batman. It's an obvious story to tell of this little bad, aristocratic, stuck-up, arrogant, snot of a kid suddenly realize that, "Wait a minute, part of my genetic heritage is Batman!" and then living up to that. You can't choose your family, but if Batman can learn to love his bloodthirsty, mentally unstable child and put him on a better path, you can probably put up with your aunt.   
 (Marvel) The Kennedys of X-men. They are Jean Grey, Scott Summers, and the large number of children — Rachel Summers, Cable, Stryfe, X-Man — they brought into this world.  There is not enough time between now and the end of Thanksgiving weekend to really spell out the craziness that this family brings. In just the last 14 years, we've seen the Summers-Grey clan time travel,  ,  , engage with  of themselves,  , save a mutant messiah, make  , and travel through space. There are some families that love drama. Yours will never be as dramatic or as tragic as the Summerses. So stop picking on your sister.   
 (DC Comics)  Raven is one of the most powerful magical heroes in the DC Universe. She has been a member of teams like the Sentinels of Magic and the Teen Titans. She got her powers from her father, Trigon, who is actually an dimension-hopping demon who raped her human mother. Raven also has some brothers on her dad's side who are out to get her. Though Raven and her family members have fought each other in comics, the biggest story between here is Raven dealing with the evil that's part of her, thanks to who her father is. Her fear of turning evil haunts her constantly and threatens to dismantle her relationships. Even though your father (or mother) is terrible (or even evil), it doesn't mean you have to follow in his (or her) footsteps.   
 (The Wicked + The Divine) In Kieron Gillen and Jamie McKelvie's world of  , gods come back every 90 years and live for two. And these gods — from every religion (Lucifer, Amaterasu, Minerva, Baal, and more) — are kind of like an omnipotent group of Kardashians. They're all vaguely related or aligned. Some are rock stars. Most are just famous for being famous. And they do   get along.   
 (The Wicked +The Divine) Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 