The government is prosecuting the immigrants Obama promised to help
For the past few months, President Obama has been working with the Department of Homeland Security to reform America's deportation policies and make them more "humane" toward unauthorized immigrants. But while Obama's doing that, he might want to pay attention to what's going on over at the Department of Justice, where US Attorneys are prosecuting and convicting hundreds of unauthorized immigrants each month — many of whom are the same immigrants the deportation review is intended to protect. US Attorneys have a great deal of autonomy when it comes to setting enforcement priorities. And many are now choosing to prosecute illegal reentry cases rather than more serious crimes — in part because the reentry cases are easier to win. Yet  In theory, the Obama administration could try to change this situation by standardizing the wildly varying prosecution policies among US Attorneys. (The administration has  ) But, for now, different parts of the administration have very different priorities when it comes to immigration policy. A group of immigrants are led out of federal court in Texas. RJ Sangosti/Denver Post Not all of the immigrants getting prosecuted for illegal reentry are model residents. But statistically speaking, the sort of people who are   to "illegally reenter" the US after leaving or being deported are longtime residents of the US who have jobs or children here, and ties to the community. And many of the hundreds of thousands of immigrants who "illegally reentered" the country at some point have lived in the US continuously for many years since then.   For an immigrant, a prosecution can be even worse than a straightforward deportation — because it is likely to prevent him from ever living in the US legally, or qualifying for any sort of protection from deportation that the Obama administration might offer in the future. Most politicians who support a "path to citizenship" don't think any immigrants with criminal records should be eligible for it. The immigration bill the Senate passed last year allows immigrants to apply for "provisional" legal status as long as they have no criminal record; if they have one or two minor offenses, they have to file a waiver and hope the federal government will approve it. But immigrants with a felony on their records — even if it's for "illegal reentry"  — are totally disqualified. The same dynamic would presumably apply to the Obama administration's upcoming reforms of the deportation system. The Obama administration might allow more immigrants to apply for administrative relief, but In all likelihood, it will exclude any immigrant with a criminal conviction, including a conviction for illegal entry.   Part of this is how many immigrants get sent to prosecutors to begin with. Border Patrol agents in New Mexico and West Texas  Even after immigrants are referred to prosecutors, prosecutors have the option not to charge them with anything. But along the border, prosecutors almost always charge them anyway.  (The US Attorneys from the Southern District of California, Arizona, New Mexico, the Southern District of Texas, Utah, Colorado, and the Central District of California did not respond to inquiries for this article.) A federal judge who handles immigration cases looks on during an immigration rally in Florida. John Moore/Getty When it comes to immigrants who get apprehended outside the border — either by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement or by local police officers — prosecutors show a lot more autonomy in choosing who to charge with illegal reentry.  In some districts, like Utah and Nebraska, prosecutors can be particularly aggressive — they prosecute nearly every immigrant referred to them by Immigration and Customs Enforcement, almost all of whom are being charged with illegal reentry rather than more serious immigration crimes (like smuggling or fraud). Other districts, like Western Michigan, prosecute only half of the referrals they get. But Marc Rosenbaum of the Migration Policy Institute says that prosecutors aren't necessarily using discretion to protect unauthorized immigrants — they're  probably using it to protect themselves. The more complicated and serious crimes ICE investigates can take more resources to prosecute, and can be harder to win convictions for. A prosecutor in Western Michigan might decide not to prosecute those cases, and instead to focus on the immigration cases that are easy to win: illegal reentry. Prosecutors in the interior are filing fewer cases for all immigration offenses than they did in 2010, as the Obama administration has focused its interior enforcement on certain types of immigrants who can be deported quickly. In absolute terms, the number of illegal reentry cases has declined, too — but its share of prosecutors' immigration caseload has increased. Three-quarters of all immigration cases are now for illegal reentry. On the border, many prosecutors give immigrants the option of a plea bargain: they can save the court's time by pleading guilty to illegal entry, which is a misdemeanor, rather than reentry. Because of this, the share of immigrants who get convicted of illegal reentry on the border is fairly low. In the interior, on the other hand, almost all immigrants who are charged with illegal reentry are convicted of it — wiping out their chance at relief from deportation. According to data from TRAC, between August 2013 and February 2014, nearly 3,000 immigrants were convicted of illegal reentry in the interior of the country. If that pattern has held, about 4,000 immigrants who would likely have qualified for immigration relief have been convicted between June 2013, when the Senate passed its immigration bill, and today. President Obama and US Attorney General Eric Holder can't control everything that federal prosecutors do. But the spokesperson for the Western District of Texas confirmed that the district "certainly takes into consideration guidance from and policies of DOJ." And sometimes that "guidance" calls on attorneys to be less aggressive in order to stay in line with administration priorities — as happened with Holder's   telling prosecutors to avoid triggering mandatory minimums for certain drug offenders. There's nothing stopping Holder from writing a similar memo on immigration. He could simply instruct prosecutors on the interior to offer immigrants the same plea deal they get on the border: accepting a misdemeanor illegal entry conviction so they don't have a felony on their records. That might make it possible  In the absence of any such guidance from Washington, US Attorneys are making their own decisions about who to prosecute, for their own reasons — and thousands of immigrants face the consequences of conviction, deportation and permanent ineligibility from relief. If the Obama administration plans to do more to protect immigrants without criminal records from deportation, it might want to make sure more immigrants aren't being given criminal records to begin with. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 