Police in Utah kill more people than gang members do
The report from Utah comes as many are questioning police use of force around the country, particularly against black men and boys. Several high-profile cases this year — including the deaths of    in Ferguson, Missouri;   in New York City; and   and 12-year-old   in Ohio — have sparked outrage and frustration. There's not much reliable data on how often police kill civilians nationwide. As my colleague Dara Lind  , the data collected by the FBI on police shootings should be treated as a minimum count, since it's voluntary and therefore incomplete. But the data does give a good idea of who is targeted by police — and there are some clear racial disparities. These victims are overwhelmingly black, young, and male.  , according to   of the available, limited  . That legal justification for police shootings comes from two Supreme Court decisions in the 1980s:   and  . Those decisions outlined two key factors behind whether a police shooting is justified: These legal standards give police officers wide latitude to use of deadly force without facing criminal punishment, even when a suspect poses no actual threat to anyone. Vox's Lind  : There are plenty of cases in which an officer might be legally   justified in using deadly force because he feels threatened, even though   there's no actual threat there. [Criminologist David] Klinger gives  the  example of a suspect who is carrying a realistic-looking toy gun.   That example bears a resemblance to the shooting death of John Crawford,   an Ohio man who was killed by police last week while carrying a toy   rifle in Walmart. Hypothetically, if the gun looked real, Klinger says, "the officer's   life was not in fact in jeopardy, but that would be an appropriate use   of force. Because a reasonable officer could have believed that that  was  a real gun." In fact, toy gun manufacturers — including the maker  of  the air rifle Crawford had — have started using this standard to  limit  their liability, putting on a warning label that tells consumers  police  could mistake their products for real guns. This broad use of force standard is seen in a recent Utah case that got national attention:  Darrien Hunt, a 22-year-old black man, was shot and killed by police in September. At the time of his death, Hunt was dressed up as a Japanese samurai and was wielding a decorative sword. Police said he became violent and attacked them with the sword when they tried to take it away, but   found four of six gunshot wounds hit Hunt on his back, suggesting he was fleeing when he was killed. The police officers involved won't face any criminal charges. Utah County Attorney Jeff Buhman  : "I find that Saratoga Springs Cpl. Matthew Schauerhamer and Officer Nicholas Judson were justified in their use of deadly force against Mr. Hunt. Their belief that deadly force was necessary to prevent death or serious bodily injury was reasonable." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 