What you need to know about the latest protests in Ferguson
On Tuesday, the day after it was announced  that police officer     for the August 9 shooting death of unarmed black 18-year-old  , a small group of protesters vented their frustrations with looting and vandalism in the streets of Ferguson, Missouri, for the second night in a row. This followed a day and evening filled with much larger, organized protests in Ferguson and across the country. The grand jury decision came after   of non-violent demonstrations and national media attention that followed   at the hands of Wilson, a white police officer. Since then, residents and outsiders from near and far consistently assembled in the St. Louis suburb to protest racially biased law enforcement practices, and specifically demanded Wilson's arrest and indictment. St. Louis County Prosecuting Attorney Robert McCulloch, announced the grand jury's decision in a  , in which he justified the grand jury's decision and discredited witnesses, many of whom were members of Brown's community. This announcement escalated the sense of racial injustice triggered by the case and set off new waves of angry demonstrations in Ferguson. There were fires and reports of gunshots and looting. Police used smoke and tear gas to clear the streets. Although most agreed that the protests involved far fewer people than usual, the smaller crowd also created far more destruction than any group of Ferguson protesters up to this point. Some critics suggested that McCulloch's timing worsened the situation. Since then, increasingly peaceful demonstrations have continued in Ferguson, with protestors' numbers varying by the day and fewer arrests each night. Here's what you need to know about what is happening, and why. RT  : WATCH:   Protesters Shut Down Walmart On Telegraph Rd   's vine  
 
 Die In. Target. South County.    Quiet, cold night outside   Police dept., a few protesters sitting in cars in the parking lot across street  Center court carousel picked for die-in by protesters at Chesterfield Mall. Stores shuttered.      Confirmed: 15 arrested in  ; one facing assault on a law enforcement officer charge. Other protesters remain peaceful. 
 
 Man carried inside police station by all fours. He screams "Mike Brown" the whole way 
 
 Smashing windows at the Meineke.  
 
 
 
 
 
 Police push protesters into residential neighborhoods. Now allowing people to leave and go to their cars. Tiffin ave.  Riot police and National Guard at   police station  Protestors have been arrested. Police backing people off the highway.    In New York, Los Angeles, Washington and Boston, hundreds of people marched through the streets in coordinated and largely peaceful demonstrations. New York protesters carved a path through Midtown and into Times Square, jamming traffic. In Washington, about 400 people made their way to the White House, where they stood outside the fence chanting, "Whose house? Our house." Dallas protesters briefly closed Interstate 35; it reopened about 10 p.m About 1,500 Boston protesters tried to block a major highway, but were stopped by a line of police. Marchers stopped in front of the South Bay House of Correction and began chanting, "Black lives matter," as inmates pounded on their windows, according to news reports. Three people were arrested on suspicion of disorderly conduct. County Police car burning in  . Rounds cooking off.  Smoke bombs? Really MSNBC? Folks on the ground are saying TEAR GAS yet you report smoke bombs?  
 
 RT  : News says it is not teargas, its smoke,   says she BURNING...um I believe her!!! The Beauty Town building, the same building as the   office, is on fire.  This is the best protest sign yet...still hurts to look at though      In a press conference held at approximately 1:30 am, St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar, joined by Missouri Highway Patrol Captain Ron Johnson, offered the following details about the night's events: Burning cop cars, Ferguson. 11/25/14  
 
 VIDEO: Fire burning in a building, Ferguson Missouri  , it certainly didn't help. Although there seemed to be strategy behind pushing the announcement until nightfall — the Washington Post's Wesley Lowery   that the evening press conference allowed time for school kids to get home and rush hour traffic to abate — many found it curious and counterproductive that McCulloch would give his remarks, which were arguably pro-Wilson, at night. MSNBC's Joy Reid said Monday night that, in choosing to announce the news after dark, authorities "deliberately almost left themselves with the people most committed to despair," suggesting that those who were inclined to take to the streets late in the evening were also the least organized and most agitated. The biggest unknown is how many protesters were responsible for the destruction and gunshots reported by the police department and who exactly they were. Many reporters on the scene had the impression that Monday night's protesters were younger and less organized than the mostly peaceful protesters who took part in the demonstrations that began in August and continued up until the announcement of the grand jury decision. "The folks that were out tonight by and large were not associated with some of the organizations that have started … after August to organize and address the deep, persistent issues here," said MSNBC's Chris Hayes. In an interview with MSNBC, Ferguson Township Committeewoman Patricia Bynes expressed doubt that the protesters who caused destruction came from the Ferguson community. It was also unclear why firefighters were delayed in arriving on the scene to extinguish the burning businesses, many of which were in flames for hours before trucks arrived. RT  :      " // Where is the Fire Department?? People protested — and will continue to protest — because the grand jury's decision means Wilson will not be arrested or charged with any crime for shooting and killing Brown, despite the fact several eyewitness accounts all give same basic  : he had both hands in the air and was attempting to surrender when Wilson fired the shots that killed him. While, according to McCulloch's post-decision statement, those accounts were not necessarily deemed reliable, they characterized many people's understanding of the case for more than three months. Unarmed black men are   by law enforcement officers, but the particular contours of this story — where it happened, when it happened, and who it happened to — made it well suited as a symbol of a larger pattern of disparate treatment of African-Americans in the St. Louis region and elsewhere in the country. The widespread use of   as a rallying cry by the protesters is evidence of this. To review:  · The extended grand jury investigation left plenty of time for statements and preparations by other government agencies, demonstrators, and outside groups, as the city and the entire nation awaited the decision about whether Wilson would be indicted. The FBI sent 100 additional agents to Ferguson and opened a special St. Louis intelligence center,   reported on November 21, and Attorney General Attorney General Eric Holder   that the Justice Department was providing new guidance to law enforcement authorities on "information, tools, and best practices to maintain public safety while safeguarding constitutional rights during First Amendment-protected events." Meanwhile, anticipating the types of confrontations that led Amnesty International to   that police in August violated Ferguson protesters' right to assemble peacefully and to condemn the use of tear gas and rubber bullets to break up protests, organizers of protests made their own preparations. Beginning in mid-November,  , a website launched by protesters, disseminated information on safe spaces for protesters, local hospitals, and contact information for lawyers. Protesters came up with proposed "rules of engagement" for the anticipated protests and presented them to the Ferguson Police Department. Police leaders met with protest leaders and agreed to 11 of the rules (including avoiding the use of excessive force and communicating to de-escalate tension), but   (including a proposed rule to avoid the use of "equipment such as armored vehicles, rubber bullets, rifles and tear gas"). As the grand jury decision loomed, government officials pleaded with and warned protesters — the overwhelming majority of whom had been peaceful since demonstrations began — to remain nonviolent. The most dramatic action taken in advance of the decision was Gov. Jay Nixon's declaration of a state of   in Ferguson, which allowed him to activate National Guard troops and placed the county police, rather than Ferguson police, in charge of security in Ferguson in the case of unrest. A spokesperson   the decision was not made because Nixon expected violence in the wake of the grand jury announcement. It was "simply the next step in continuing efforts to plan and be prepared for any contingency, and that means making sure these resources are in place in advance of any announcement." Still, that decision, combined with   that "violence will not be tolerated" in the wake of the decision, added to tensions between protesters and government officials. Some critics   that his apparent adversarial focus on the handful of looters who took advantage of August's overwhelmingly peaceful protests, instead of the mostly peaceful demonstrators, served to foster a culture of violence and fear in the city. And it was galling for many that officials like Nixon or even President Barack Obama were focusing on the actions of protesters and not shining that light on law enforcement, which had been criticized since August for shooting tear gas and rubber bullets at protesters and accused of trampling on First Amendment rights. In response to one of Nixon's warnings about violence, St. Louis Alderman Antonio French, an active protester, responded with this tweet: "Violence will not be tolerated."   Ironically, this is the message of protestors as well.  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 