Canadian Parliament shooter Michael Zehaf-Bibeau: what we know and what we don't know
A gunman entered Canada's Parliament building in Ottawa on Wednesday morning, where he fired multiple shots. The shooter, who killed a soldier, has now been identified as  — Zehaf-Bibeau entered Parliament Hill, in downtown Ottawa, on Wednesday morning, where he   both outside and inside the Parliament building. — At least two uniformed Canadians, a soldier and a Parliament security guard, were shot.   
 — Here is a Facebook photo of Cpl. Nathan Cirillo. He was 24 years old.  Zehaf-Bibeau — This video, shot by a Globe reporter, is from the shooting inside of Parliament. The shooter is not visible, but many shots can be heard, indicating the extent of the firefight: Rideau street east of the Hill has also been cleared  — This photo from Getty shows emergency workers loading Cirillo into an ambulance:   
 (MICHEL COMTE/AFP/Getty) — There was no shooting at the nearby Rideau Center, as some outlets had previously reported. — Zehaf-Bibeau's name   in the Canadian criminal database, including two arrests ten years ago for possession of, respectively, marijuana and PCP. He failed to arrive to a court date in 2006 for marijuana charges, but  . All of these arrests were in Montreal. Assuming there aren't any other 32 year old Canadians named Michael Zehaf-Bibeau, it's probably him. — Why Zehaf-Bibeau attacked the parliament. That's just totally unclear at this point. — What kind of weapon he used. There have been reports of both rifles and shotguns. — Whether this tweet, sent by an account that claims to be affiliated with ISIS and purports to show "the Ottawa gunman," is a picture of Zehaf-Bibeau or in any other way legitimate:   
 ( ) Colleague says they were taken away from the Hill because there may be a shooter on the roof. May explain why we are still in lockdown. 
 
 Police source has told a Globe colleague of mine that a second shooter has been shot 
 
 "We had numerous suspects who were on foot" Ottawa constable on MSNBC just now. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 