Forensic expert: I never said Michael Brown's autopsy confirmed Darren Wilson's story
The   on  , who was killed by Ferguson, Missouri, police officer Darren Wilson on August 9, has been obtained by the St. Louis Post-Dispatch. According to the newspaper, two independent forensic experts who looked at the report indicated that the results support Wilson's version of events. But one of the forensic experts quoted in the story has since said that the newspaper presented her remarks without some very important context. "What happens sometimes is when you get interviewed and you have a long conversation with a journalist, they're going to take things out of context," Judy Melinek, a forensic pathologist in San Francisco, told   on Wednesday evening. "I made it very clear that we only have partial information here. We don't have the scene information. We don't have the police investigation. We don't have all the witness statements. And you can't interpret autopsy findings in a vacuum." According to the  , Melinek  In her later interview with MSNBC, Melinek acknowledged that an autopsy report wouldn't provide any information for the (at least) six bullets that missed Brown during the shooting, some of which could have been fired while Brown was running away or holding his hands up. Those kinds of details would need to be filled by other sources from a broader investigation. Melinek also clarified to MSNBC that she didn't know for certain, based on the autopsy alone, whether Brown truly reached for Wilson's gun, although the autopsy does leave that open as a possibility. "I'm not saying that Brown going for the gun is the only explanation. I'm saying the officer said he was going for the gun and the right thumb wound supports that," she said, according to MSNBC. "I have limited information. It could also be consistent with other scenarios. That's the important thing. That's why the witnesses need to speak to the grand jury and the grand jury needs to hear all the unbiased testimony and compare those statements to the physical evidence." Following the Brown shooting, demonstrators took to the streets of Ferguson to protest what many saw as unfair treatment by local police of the St. Louis suburb's majority black community. The protests dwindled during early September, but they   later in the month and throughout October as concerns remained unaddressed.  commissioned by Brown's family found Wilson shot Brown at least six times from the front, and two of  the bullets struck Brown on the head.  : This post was updated to include Melinek's recent statements to MSNBC, which clarify the quotes attributed to her in the Post-Dispatch article. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 