Who is Jeffrey Fowle, the American just freed from North Korea?
Tuesday afternoon, the State Department announced that Jeffrey Fowle, an American who has been held for months in North Korea, is being released into American custody. It's great news. But who is Fowle, and why was he being detained? Here's a guide to what happened — and what North Korea might be thinking. Fowle is a 56-year-old city worker from the Dayton, Ohio area.  to organized religion, which it considers a threat to the official state orthodoxy and system By smuggling in and distributing a bible, Fowle was challenging the official ideology of the North Korean government and crossing one of the country's brightest red-lines for foreign tourists. While most Americans who visit North Korea do so safely, some who've attempted to preach or distribute Christian literature have been imprisoned, sometimes for long periods, and only released after heavy intervention from the US government. The North Korean government allowed Fowle to do some press, like  , while imprisoned. In these appearances, Fowle apologized for his actions and pleaded for leniency, citing his wife and three children at home in Ohio. Now, he's been released. The State Department greeted Fowle's release warmly, saying it was a " " on Pyongyang's part. However, it also cautioned that "we remain focused on the continued detention of Kenneth Bae and Matthew Miller and again call on [North Korea] to immediately release them." Bae and Miller are in bad shape. While Fowle was never officially sentenced, Miller was sentenced to six years of hard labor  . Bae is currently serving a 15-year term. It's not clear why North Korea decided to release Fowle just after sentencing Miller. According to  , the  So why release Fowle, then? As Snyder notes, North Korea has been waffling over the detained Americans for a while — for example, twice inviting an American envoy to Pyongyang to negotiate for Bae's release and then rescinding the invitation. Snyder blames this on "apparent internal confusion inside North Korea," but we'll never really know. That's the ultimate dilemma of diplomacy with North Korea: even when they do something that seems conciliatory such as releasing Fowle, it's hard to be sure why they're doing it. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 