Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson won't face criminal charges for killing Michael Brown
  
 A protester on August 17 in Ferguson holds her hands up in defiance as tear gas and flames surround her. (Scott Olson / Getty Images News) Wilson stopped Brown on August 9 for  , according to Ferguson Police Chief Tom Jackson. A few minutes later, Wilson shot Brown to death. The details of exactly what happened between the initial confrontation and shooting are unclear.   from police and eyewitness accounts suggests there was a brief physical confrontation at Wilson's SUV. Brown then ran, and soon after that, Wilson killed Brown. Wilson's   claims that Brown reached for his gun and made him fear for his life during the initial confrontation. The eyewitnesses interviewed by the press seem to   that Brown was shot while he had his hands up. (St. Louis County Attorney Robert McCulloch later claimed that many of the public eyewitnesses proved to be unreliable, because they changed their statements.) The shooting almost immediately triggered protests in Ferguson, where people filled the streets and took up the chant " ." The protesters were largely peaceful, especially after some rioting on the first Sunday of demonstrations led to a concerted effort by leaders to keep people calm. But police at first reacted with  , in some cases using weapons like rubber bullets and tear gas on peaceful demonstrators and , and arresting protesters and members of the media alike. The protests largely dwindled in early September. They   toward the end of the month, when a Brown memorial mysteriously burned down and Ferguson's police chief issued an apology that many locals saw as too little, too late. Protests were   by Ferguson October, a movement activists launched on October 10 to highlight "the epidemic of police violence facing Black and Brown communities." The protests have continued to fluctuate since then. For the most part, they've appeared to centralize on one goal: Wilson needed to be indicted and taken to court.   
 Police stand guard at the courthouse where a grand jury is meeting to review the case against Ferguson Police officer Darren Wilson. (Scott Olson / Getty Images News) During a grand jury, people are presented with evidence to decide whether someone — in this case, Wilson — should be charged with a crime. If they choose to indict, the case goes to court. If they don't, the case effectively dies. Grand jury proceedings are typically secret. Participants are supposed to stay quiet about the hearings, even after a decision is reached. Leaks during the hearings are grounds for restarting the entire process. But St. Louis County Attorney McCulloch later announced that he will release all the evidence presented to the grand jury if it decided not to indict Wilson. The prosecutor has almost complete control as to what evidence the grand jury sees and hears. In the case of Wilson, McCulloch   that "absolutely everything will be presented to the grand jury. Every scrap of paper that we have. Every photograph that was taken." Since prosecutors have so much control over the evidence, getting an indictment is generally perceived as easy. As Vox's Amanda Taub  , "The   within the legal profession is that a decent prosecutor could get a grand jury to indict 'a ham sandwich.'" But some argue McCulloch, who protesters see as biased due to his family ties to law enforcement, never meant to get an indictment — and actually launched the grand jury proceedings as a delay tactic. "Prosecutors have the responsibility to make tough decisions about  cases. Here, the district attorney should review the evidence, consult  with investigators, and decide whether he believes there is probable  cause to charge Wilson with a crime," Alex Little, a former federal prosecutor,   Taub. "The idea that the district attorney has to wait for the grand jury to spend weeks combing through the evidence is flat wrong, and if his office is promoting that explanation for its delay in acting, then it's being deliberately misleading."   
 A police officer reacts to protesters in Ferguson, Missouri. (Scott Olson / Getty Images News) Two Supreme Court decisions in the 1980s,   and  , set the legal framework for determining when deadly force by cops is reasonable. Constitutionally, "police officers are allowed to shoot under two  circumstances," David Klinger, a University of Missouri-St. Louis  professor who studies use of force,   Vox's Dara Lind.  The first circumstance is "to protect their life or the life of another  innocent party" — what departments call the "defense-of-life" standard.  The second circumstance is to prevent a suspect from escaping, but only  if the officer has probable cause to think the suspect poses a dangerous threat to others. The logic behind the second circumstance, Klinger explained, comes from Tennessee vs. Garner. That case involved a  pair of police officers who shot a 15-year-old boy as he fled from a  burglary. (He'd stolen $10 and a purse from a house.) The court ruled  that cops couldn't shoot every felon who tried to escape. But, as  Klinger said, "they basically say that the job of a cop is to protect  people from violence, and if you've got a violent person who's fleeing,  you can shoot them to stop their flight." For the grand jury in Ferguson, the question was whether Wilson was aware that Brown allegedly took part in a robbery prior to the shooting. Wilson   he became aware during the encounter that Brown was a robbery suspect  and radioed the realization in as soon as he knew. The key to both of the legal standards — defense-of-life and fleeing a  violent felony — is that it doesn't matter whether there is an actual  threat when force is used. Instead, what matters is the officer's  "objectively reasonable" belief that there is a threat. That standard comes from the other Supreme Court case that guides  use-of-force decisions:  . This was a civil lawsuit  brought by a man who survived his encounter with police officers, but  who was treated roughly, had his face shoved into the hood of a car,  and broke his foot — all while he was suffering a diabetic attack. The  court didn't rule on whether the officers' treatment of him had been  justified, but it said the officers couldn't justify their  conduct just based on whether their intentions were good. They had to  demonstrate that their actions were "objectively reasonable," given the  circumstances and compared to what other police officers might do. What's "objectively reasonable" changes as the circumstances  change. "The moment that you no longer present a threat, I need to stop  shooting," said Klinger. According to the St. Louis County Police  Department's account, Wilson fired one shot from inside the police car.  But Brown was killed 150 feet away, after several shots had been  fired. To justify the shooting, Wilson would need to demonstrate that he  feared for his life not just when Brown was by the car, but even after  he started shooting. The officer would need to establish that, right up  until the last shot was fired, he felt Brown continued to pose a threat  to him whether he actually was or not. "One can't just say, 'Because I could use deadly force 10 seconds ago, that means I can use deadly force again now,'" said    
 A peaceful but emotional protest in Ferguson on August 12. (Scott Olson / Getty Images News) Since the Ferguson protests were so focused on getting an indictment, it's almost certain the grand jury's decision not to indict will aggravate a lot of demonstrators. And government officials and businesses appear to be preparing for the worst. Even before the grand jury decision was announced, Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon   a state of emergency to mobilize the state's National Guard in Ferguson — a move that triggered criticisms from   and, according to the  , US Attorney General Eric Holder. In a letter   by St. Louis news station Fox 2, the owner of a shopping complex wrote, "We are asking every store manager to give some serious thought to what your response would be in the event of demonstrations or civil unrest." Other stores have reportedly boarded their windows, according  to  . The Jennings School District, which includes the eastern edge of Ferguson,   on Monday and Tuesday of the week of Thanksgiving in expectation of a grand jury ruling. Ferguson-Florrisant School District later   on Tuesday. Law enforcement took some precautions as well. The FBI sent teams of agents and officers to the area prior to the protests, according to  . And local police geared up for potential unrest, the Huffington Post's Ryan Reilly  : "The St. Louis County Police Department has stocked up on tear gas, less-lethal ammunition and plastic handcuffs in anticipation of massive protests in the suburb of Ferguson, Missouri, if a grand jury doesn't indict the police officer who killed 18-year-old Michael Brown."   
 Eric Holder is upset with leaks coming out of the Darren Wilson investigation. (Alex Wong / Getty Images News) There are several ways Wilson could still end up facing trial. It's possible that the state attorney general could bring criminal charges against Wilson, regardless of the grand jury decision. A federal investigation, led by the Justice Department, is also  looking at whether Wilson violated Brown's civil rights by shooting and  killing the unarmed teen, but recent leaks reported by the   and   suggest the feds don't have the evidence to prove Wilson willfully violated Brown's civil rights. Barring any formal charges, the Brown family could file a civil lawsuit against Wilson or the Ferguson Police Department. And Ferguson Police Chief Jackson   to conduct an internal investigation should Wilson not face charges. It's possible Wilson won't return to the Ferguson Police Department regardless of the grand jury decision. People reportedly close to Wilson   the New York Times that Wilson has no intention of returning to the police department and is negotiating the conditions of his leave with city officials. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 