Mexico's 43 missing students are victims of America's war on drugs
The United States'   isn't just doing damage within the US: it's helping to drive appalling atrocities in Mexico and Central America. Torture, forced disappearances, violence used to silence and punish dissent — these are crimes most commonly associated with civil wars, brutal dictatorships, or terrorist insurgencies. But drug cartels and criminal gangs are using those same tactics throughout much of Central America today, as a direct result of American policies in the war on drugs. You may have heard, most recently, about the excavations of mass graves in Mexico, in search of 43 college students who ware missing, presumed murdered, for political reasons.    
 Police arrest suspected members of Mexico's Los Zetas cartel in Jalapa, Guatemala, in 2012 (STR/AFP/Getty Images) As part of the war on drugs, the US operates a range of programs to encourage  But those policies never actually end the drug trade or drug-related violence. Rather, they simply push that violence out of one area and into another, by forcing traffickers into weaker, more vulnerable countries that are even less equipped to combat them. The nature of the US war on drugs means that d The past few decades have seen that process play out over and over again. In the 1990s and 2000s, for example, Colombia upped efforts to crack down on its powerful trafficking organizations, with a great deal of US help. But because the US had neither ended American consumers' demand for narcotics nor fundamentally altered the policies of its war on drugs, the Colombian traffickers were simply replaced by new crews of ultra-violent criminals in Mexico, where they have wreaked almost indescribable havoc.   
 One of the mass graves being excavated in Iguala, Mexico as part of the search for the missing students. (Pedro Pardo/AFP/Getty Images) Although police have identified multiple pits filled with bodies in the area, the remains found thus far have turned out to belong to other nameless victims, not the missing students. (You know things are bad when an investigation has to begin with the question "  mass grave?") The disappearance of the 43 students has made international headlines, but they are only the latest appalling episode of violence in Mexico's drug war, which   estimates claimed 60,000 lives between 2006 and 2012 alone. The killings are often flamboyantly violent, designed to terrify entire communities, not just eliminate cartels' immediate enemies. This month, for instance, cartel hit men   of Maria del Rosario Fuentes, a citizen journalist who had criticized them. Nor are such attacks limited to Mexico. In Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, violence committed by drug cartels and the gangs with which they collaborate has produced some of the highest murder rates in the world. The   has referred to the smuggling routes along the Guatemala-Honduras border as a "corridor of violence," where murder and other crimes cluster along the path of drugs heading towards the United States. The problem is so bad that it can no longer be contained by national borders: between late 2013 and the middle of this year, more than 68,000 unaccompanied children fled north to escape the violence that was targeting their homes and schools, causing a refugee crisis on the United States' own southern border. While the American policy response to this has mostly been to ask what we should do with the children who arrive, it's also worth asking how things got so bad in their home countries that they would attempt such a dangerous trip, what role the US has played in helping to create those crises. There has been and doubtless will continue to be much debate within the US over what the war on drugs does to Americans. And yet, these debates on the merits of the drug war too rarely consider its substantial death toll abroad. Even opponents of drug prohibition tend to focus on its costs here at home: communities crippled by mass incarceration, large-scale theft in the name of "asset forfeiture," police militarization, gang violence. Those domestic problems are serious, and they would, on their own, be grounds for changing US policies. But they are   on their own. The war on drugs is empowering monsters and endangering the innocent from Texas to Tegucigalpa. That needs to end. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 