Some of psychology's most influential studies were also completely unethical
Some of the most important studies in the history of psychology couldn't be done today — because they were incredibly unethical. That includes the "Little Albert" study from 1920, in which researchers purposefully terrified a small child to study how fear works. It also includes the famous Stanford prison experiment of 1971, in which subjects acted as prison guards and mistreated fake inmates — a powerful look at how cultural roles can influence behavior. These studies and their findings were hugely influential. They would also — for good reason — be barred from happening today. Nowadays, all research being conducted with federal funding has to be   for several ethical criteria. For example, t These rules also mean that many of those important earlier studies — like the Stanford prison experiment — can't be replicated exactly. So it's hard to truly test the methods and conclusions of some of the most foundational studies in psychology. And that means that we're always going to be debating what, exactly, these studies really mean.   
 ( ) For a   published in 1920, researchers John B. Watson and Rosalie Rayner, of Johns Hopkins University, trained a baby boy they called Albert to irrationally fear a white rat and other objects. They did so by repeatedly putting the rat near the baby while  By the end of the experiment, the baby was also terrified of lots of other objects with similar qualities, including a fur coat and a Santa Claus mask with a white beard.  There are many hypotheses for who Albert was. A thorough   published in 2009 in the journal of the American Psychological Association concluded that Albert was most likely a boy named Douglas Merritte, the son of a Johns Hopkins wet nurse who left the job at about the same time Albert left the study. Whether or not Albert suffered any long-term effects from this research is still unclear. Today, scientists could never get away with repeatedly terrifying a small child like this. But t   
 Ontario Science Centre Milgram electric box ( ) In the 1960s and '70s, Stanley Milgram produced a series of   investigating the nature of obedience. In the most famous one, researchers told  The "learner" was actually in on the study. At one point, after every shock, he started yelling in pain and demanding that it stop. Still, a researcher encouraged the participant to continue giving shocks. And they did.   how everyday people could act inhumanely in obedience to an authority figure — such as was demonstrated in the atrocities of World War II. But this study couldn't get carried out in its entirety today. Although some degree of deception is common in many studies, the anguish of thinking that you've severely hurt or killed someone is just too great to justify. And that means the study will always remain subject to much debate. In 2009, a   went as far as the learner's first protest and found similar obedience rates at that point. But we'll never really know if people today would still go all the way. ( ) In 1971, psychologists recruited male college students to play prisoners or guards 24 hours a day for two weeks at a mock prison in the basement of a Stanford building. This later became known as  . Even though the roles were randomly assigned, some of the guards became so cruel (including sometimes banning clothing and the right to use the toilet, and using increasingly strenuous exercise as punishment) that the researchers stopped the experiment after just six days. And within those six days, several prisoners freaked out so badly that they had to be let go, and one even went on a hunger strike. Even more remarkable, many of the "prisoners" stayed even though they were clearly in a lot of distress — possibly because they didn't realize they could leave. Today, psychology researchers are expected to tell participants that they have   at any time. But that didn't happen in this study. The Stanford Prison Experiment, run by psychologist Philip Zimbardo, is one of the most famous pieces of evidence that cultural roles can have an exceptionally strong influence on people's behavior. It's become one of the most talked about studies in all of social psychology. But it's also been contentious. Other researchers   about the study's  and conclusions. For example, recent news reports about prison brutality may have led participants to simply give psychologists the drama they thought they wanted. And the exact wording of Zimbardo's instructions may have egged them on. To really get a sense of how valid the study was, researchers would ideally want to replicate it in full. But good luck trying to do that. "No behavioral research that puts people in that kind of setting can ever be done again in America," Zimbardo   Stanford's alumni magazine in 2011. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 