What you should know about the surprisingly promising push to shrink federal prisons
Congress hasn't exactly covered itself in glory over the last few years. But there's at least one issue on which legislators are making real progress: criminal justice reform. And they've actually worked on a set of bipartisan bills aiming to reduce the nation's federal prison population. The most promising one is the   The Smarter Sentencing Act would halve the mandatory sentence for federal drug crimes — which account for   of the US' 200,000 federal prisoners. That would be the biggest reduction in prison sentences since the wars on drugs and crime escalated in the late 20th century. And while the   for the first time in decades in 2013, keeping that trend going is going to require a permanent reduction in how long new prisoners get sentenced to serve. The bill has three components — one looking backward to current prisoners, and two looking forward to future ones. It would finish a job Congress started at the beginning of the Obama administration, by reducing the disparity between crack and powder cocaine sentences for current prisoners, in addition to new convictions. But it would also, and more importantly, take on a new set of sentencing reforms for future cases — sentencing drug offenders to half as long as they'd serve now.   New York Daily News via Getty Images 
 A vial of crack coaine. (New York Daily News via Getty Images) But the Fair Sentencing Act was only a  in the words of criminal-justice experts: it only applied to people who were convicted after the law was signed. That meant that someone in prison today for selling crack in 1991 would serve more time than someone convicted of selling the same amount of crack in 2011. The Smarter Sentencing Act closes the gap, by adding a "back-end reform" that would reduce the sentences of current prisoners. It would allow the 8,800 or so prisoners who are serving now-obsolete sentences under the Fair Sentencing Act to petition to get those sentences reduced, in line with current law.   
 In all,   that about 250,000 prisoners would get released earlier over the next decade under the Smarter Sentencing Act. The Department of Justice, meanwhile,  that eight years after the bill is passed, the federal prison population will be about 50,000 smaller than it would be under current law. That's still more than current or planned federal prisons have the capacity to handle, but it's a big improvement.   
 A judge writes an order. (Andrey Burmakin) The Smarter Sentencing Act also gives judges back a little more discretion to go against a mandatory minimum, so that a defendant who's clearly never going to commit another crime doesn't have to spend as long in prison as a career criminal. Right now, in very particular cases, a judge is allowed to pull a "safety valve" and sentence someone to less than the mandatory minimum. But the current safety-valve requirements are so restrictive that they're essentially off limits to almost anyone with a prior criminal conviction. The Smarter Sentencing Act would expand the safety valve slightly: it would make it possible for the judge to pull it for a second offense, as long as the defendant had served a year or less in prison the first time around. Since so many federal prisoners are serving time for drugs, cutting down drug sentences would have a pretty big impact. But most of the people in prison in the US are in state prisons, not federal ones. So there's only so much any federal law can do to reduce incarceration overall. Many states have gotten out ahead of the federal government in reforming their sentencing laws, and some have reduced their incarceration rates. But last year, just as the federal prison population began to drop, the state population   — including in some states that had passed criminal-justice reform laws in recent years. What makes this especially tricky is that  not drug crimes. While some Democrats and some Republicans have gotten on board with the notion that drug sentences are too long, it's much more difficult to argue that violent criminals should spend less time in prison. But that's exactly   if they're going to decrease the state prison population by as much as the Smarter Sentencing Act would reduce the federal one. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 