Federal investigation: Cleveland police are poorly trained and inappropriately violent
  Stefan Hlabse/AFP via Getty Images 
 A Cleveland Police car. (Stefan Hlabse / AFP via Getty Images)  found Cleveland police officers used excessive deadly force, including shootings and head strikes with impact weapons; unnecessary, excessive, and retaliatory force, including Tasers, chemical sprays, and their fists; and excessive force against people with mental illness or in crisis, including one situation in which officers were called exclusively to check up on someone's welfare. Police officers also used "poor and dangerous tactics" that often put them "in situations where avoidable force becomes inevitable and places officers and civilians at unnecessary risk," according to the report. The Justice Department attributed many of these problems to inadequate training and supervision. "Supervisors tolerate this behavior and, in some cases, endorse it," the report said. "Officers report that they receive little supervision, guidance, and support from the Division, essentially leaving them to determine for themselves how to perform their difficult and dangerous jobs." Holder argued that fixing these issues is crucial for both the general public and police. "Accountability and legitimacy are essential for communities to trust their police departments, and for there to be genuine collaboration between police and the citizens they serve," he said.   Tamir Rice: The following is a photo of the child shot & killed by a Cleveland Police officer    — WEWS NewsChannel5 (@WEWS)  Cleveland police officer Timothy Loehmann shot  , a black 12-year-old boy who was carrying a toy gun, on November 22 in a park. Rice died the following day. The federal investigation didn't look into the Rice shooting. A surveillance video   by police showed Loehmann shooting Rice within two seconds of getting out of his squad car. Loehmann's partner, Frank Garmback, remained at the wheel of the car, reported  . Rice had in his waistband an airsoft toy gun with the orange safety indicator removed, and police said that he reached for it after officers told him to raise his hands. Officers did not know the weapon was a toy at the time of the shooting, according to police.   BB gun Cleveland police said a 12yo boy pulled from his waistband before they shot him.    — Cory Shaffer (@cory_shaffer)  Police arrived on the scene after receiving at least one 911 call. A caller told 911 dispatchers that a child is "pulling a gun in and out of his pants and pointing it at people." He later added, "It's probably fake." The callers' comments were not relayed to officers. From Cleveland.com reporter  : Here's the press release.  :  . Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 