What Chris Rock, Cher, and other celebrities said about the Eric Garner decision
Celebrities are often encouraged by their representatives to refrain from saying anything during moments of national crisis out of a fear that they their statements will spurn criticism. Wednesday night, though, when the announcement came that the NYPD officer who was filmed   had not been indicted, many celebrities broke their silence to speak out against injustice. Here is what they had to say: This one was on film.  
 
 
 
 Yes it is. " : .  Powerful image:  "  Make sure you do something to let YOUR government know how you feel when something is unjust., not JUST your followers on twitter... How do "crazy" cops keep getting away with this?!? He murdered that man. Stop the madness.    
 
 Deep Hurt. We're Men. Human. We feel pain. There will be one collective cry added to these tears.Then the birth of a New Anger.  
 
 We watched him Die. Choked to Death. The world is watching we seek JUSTICE. He couldn't breathe.Were breathing Fire.  It's going to be a long winter. A lot of hearts have just gone cold. The "symbolic death" of hope, trust & justice transpired 12/3. We mourn 4 haters….say what you wish about me,you can’t imagine how little I care 4 your good opinion of me.We R Still a Country Divided in many ways 
 
 When I guy says " I can't breathe " he can't      
 
 If all people are created equal tell   to stop using the word  I wouldn't feel right posting anything else before saying my heart hurts today. 
 
 Non-white human beings are human beings. Human beings you don't happen to like, are human beings. Human beings incidentally, have rights. 
 
 I think all these privatized prisons are only built for black men in America... 
 
 Mike brown, Eric garner two new unfortunate situation. I'm not sure what the out come will be, but I…  
 
 Eric Garner was killed by the NYPD. Unlawfully, disgracefully. Watch this video & demand justice:  
 
 No words.  
 
 I’m on TV.. I play a TV cop.. And these fuckin cops are outta control NATIONALLY! 
 
 It’s starting in Philly ->  Philadelphia protesters  chanting "I can't breathe" in solidarity with    
 
 SMDH....God the world is crying for your help. This really makes me sad. All I can do is pray & I plan on doing ...  
 
 if ur desperately trying to justify violence against unarmed civilians in 2014, who do u think you would have been in 1964 or 1944? 
 
 Somebody's Eyes Are   LIVES MATTER. WE NEED THE FEDS FOR JUSTICE. These Grand Juries In…  
 
 He wasn't even getting aggressive. I feel sick. Can't sleep.    A badge is a pass to do whatever. 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 