Colombia's war with FARC and why it might finally end, explained
The FARC, a Marxist rebel group that has been fighting a 50-year civil war in Colombia, announced a unilateral, indefinite ceasefire on Wednesday. In a statement on its website, the group announced that it hopes the ceasefire will "transform into an armistice," thus potentially ending a war that has raged in Colombia for half a century, claiming  That ceasefire is an important step for the conflict and for the peace negotiations that have dragged on for two years. But 50 years of war can't end overnight, and significant obstacles to peace still remain. Here's what you need to know about the FARC, its conflict with the Colombian government, and what this announcement means for the chances of peace in Colombia.   
 FARC fighters in 1999. (Marcelo Salinas/AFP/Getty Images)   
 Cocaine seized from a FARC laboratory. (Guillermo Legaria/AFP/Getty Images) The FARC grew in power during the 1980s and early '90s. The drug trade was flourishing in its territory in rural Colombia; the extra revenue allowed it to expand its operations. Colombian cartels became increasingly powerful players in the cocaine trade in the 1980s, which the FARC exploited by levying "taxes" on the cultivation of coca plants within territory it controlled. (The drug trade fueled both sides of the conflict: the right-wing paramilitaries were also deeply involved in drug trafficking.) The FARC also grew reliant on kidnapping as a source of revenue and political pressure; many of its victims were held in the mountains for years at a time.   
 Anti-narcotics police blow up a FARC cocaine installation. (Guillermo Legaria/AFP/GettyImages) In 2002, President Álvaro Uribe took office after campaigning on a promise to end the war. He cracked down on the FARC and was largely successful in undermining the group's power. The military regained much of the FARC's territory, and by In 2010,   
 Weapons seized from the FARC and other criminal groups, about to be destroyed. (Guillermo Legaria/AFP/Getty Images) On Wednesday, the FARC announced an indefinite, unilateral ceasefire, and said that they hope it turns into an armistice. That is a significant step towards peace, but there are still major obstacles to a final peace agreement. Arnson sees today's agreement as a way for the FARC to "up the ante" on its ceasefire demands, but does not expect the strategy to be successful.  Today's unilateral ceasefire is also unlikely to resolve the biggest remaining point of contention in the peace talks: whether FARC combatants will face criminal punishment after they put down their guns and demobilize. "The issue of impunity for the FARC is the most important, and most difficult in the peace talks," Arnson noted. "The FARC is opposed to the idea that its commanders would lay down weapons and then go to jail. But at the same time, the military says that there are members of the armed forces who are in jail for human rights abuses, and so it has to be the case that the FARC will also pay with jail time." Even if that issue is resolved, a final hurdle will still remain: the peace accords must be approved by the Colombian public in a popular referendum. That means that Santos's negotiating position is constrained by public opinion, not just his government's willingness to make sacrifices in exchange for peace. Still, the unilateral ceasefire is a step in a good direction and one that, after 50 years of war, Colombia badly needs. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 