40 states relaxed their drug laws in the past 5 years
States have significantly relaxed their drug laws in recent years — a sign that any ramping down of the war on drugs may happen at the state rather than federal level. Forty states relaxed their drug laws between 2009 and 2013, a new Pew Research Center analysis  . This is a major policy shift from the 1980s, when fears about a nationwide crack-cocaine epidemic led states to impose strict measures like mandatory minimum sentences. So why are states relaxing their approach now? And how, exactly, do these changes work? When states passed stricter drug laws, there was a spike in incarcerations for drug offenses. Relaxing those laws correlated with a recent decline in drug-related incarceration rates. Keeping people in prison is pricey: Pew points to research from the Vera Institute of Justice that   the average inmate costs states more than $31,000 each year. The high price imposes substantial costs for states, which incarcerated   in 2012. At $31,000 per inmate, that's more than $41 billion in annual costs for states (about 2.5 percent of  ). The problem is even more challenging in states with serious prison overcrowding problems. The Supreme Court   California in particular for its high prison population, forcing the state to make changes and reduce its amount of inmates. (In California, however, the problems went beyond high costs; the state   an increased risk of violence and security breaches as a result of overcrowding.) And the cost of so much imprisonment doesn't even count the billions more states  , with   to show for it in the past decade. With states  , trimming these costs can play a key role in balancing budgets. A recent Pew survey   two-thirds of Americans support government policies that treat, not prosecute, drug users. About 63 percent of Americans also backed moving away from mandatory minimum sentences for non-violent drug crimes — an increase of 16 percentage points since 2001. In comparison, Pew notes 73 percent of Americans in 1990   for major drug traffickers. Pew found similar shifts in opinion across the board. When it came to  , for example, 54 percent of Americans are now in support. That's a flip from just four years ago, when 52 percent said marijuana should not be legal. Pew isn't the only organization to report a shift in public opinion on drugs, either. Gallup   58 percent of Americans now support marijuana legalization, up from 31 percent in 2000. It's a big swing in public opinion, and state legislators seem to be taking notice. States have taken a wide array of steps against the war on drugs in recent years, with a lot of variation from place to place. The biggest steps occurred in Colorado and Washington, where voters decided to outright legalize marijuana. With 40,000   to be in federal and state prisons due to marijuana and   for possessing the drug, legalization could help reduce the costs of law enforcement and incarceration. Outside Colorado and Washington, 15 states and the District of Columbia have passed legislation  , which removed criminal penalties — importantly, imprisonment — for possessing, and sometimes selling, the drug. Maryland will  soon, as well. Some states also relaxed other laws aimed at drug offenders. Ohio, for instance,   possession of marijuana-related paraphernalia and   prison sentencing reforms that will let nonviolent offenders avoid prison or get out of prison early. All states also adopted or expanded some form of  . Instead of condemning drug users to prison, these courts supervise rehabilitation attempts to avoid public health and safety problems that arise from drug abuse. Texas in particular increased the number of drug courts in the state since 2001 from seven to 71,  . The federal government is now catching up to states with   and  . But for states these kinds of changes are already commonplace. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 