Bill Cosby has 2 new accusers. Read the entire timeline of allegations against him.
Two more women say Bill Cosby raped them. At a Los Angeles  , Linda Brown and Lise-Lotte Lublin each came forward Thursday to accuse him of sexual assault. Brown said the comedian drugged and sexually assaulted her at a Toronto hotel in 1969, when she was 20 years old. After she accepted a drink from him, "he flipped me over and sexually assaulted me," she said.  The two are the most recent additions to a growing list of women who  that they know or suspect that Cosby sexually assaulted and/or drugged them. The dates of the alleged incidents described by Cosby's many accusers, all of which the 77-year-old comedian and his lawyers have denied, span from 1965 to 2008. The allegations often follow a similar narrative: Cosby offers a woman a cup of coffee or alcoholic beverage, after which he allegedly sexually assaults her while she is impaired or unconscious. In addition, a handful of other women have accused Cosby of drugging them without sexually assaulting them, or of inappropriate grabbing or kissing without drugging them. The women include lawyers, waitresses, aspiring actresses, and fellow celebrities, such as models Janice Dickinson and Beverly Johnson. Some had dating relationships with Cosby, while others  say they saw him as a mentor. Some accusers say they were in their teens at the time of their claims. It's a lot to keep up with. Here's a timeline of the alleged events, significant legal developments, and public allegations. Cosby drugs and rapes 21-year-old Cindra Ladd, according to her January 2015 essay for the Huffington Post. Cosby drugs and sexually assaults model Linda Brown, according to her 2015 statement at a press conference organized by Gloria Allred. A 21-year-old aspiring model identified only as "Lisa" accepts two drinks from Cosby, blacks out after he strokes her hair, and doesn't recall anything else until she wakes up at home two days later, according to her 2014 interview with Dr. Phil. Cosby drugs and sexually assaults model Lise-Lotte Lublin, according to her 2015 statement at a press conference organized by attorney Gloria Allred. A woman identified only as "Lisa," tells CBS' Dr. Phil that she met Cosby in 1988 when she a 21-year-old aspiring model. She said that after accepting two drinks from Cosby,  , but she blacked out and doesn't recall anything else until she woke up at home two days later. Chloe Goins tells the   that after accepting a drink from Cosby at the Playboy mansion in 2008, she woke up naked to him licking her feet with his pants around his ankles. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 