This surreal photo shows the state of the MTA's war on graffiti
What happened after New York got rid of all the graffiti on its subway cars? The city now lets companies do their own graffiti — for a fee.  snapped a shot of this surreal promotional subway car: Congrats  , you wiped out subway graffiti and replaced it with ads for a reality show about street art  
 
 The promo is for  , a new Oxygen Media show that follows 10 aspiring street artists as they compete for a $100,000 prize. The show was actually shot in Los Angeles, not New York. MTA spokesman Adam Lisberg  , saying that it's not   a violation of the agency's long-standing anti-graffiti policies. "The typeface of the ad itself was not graffiti-style," he said, "and our research concluded that everything the show depicts is done legally with permission."   
 Graffiti in 1980. (Jamel Shabazz/Getty Images) At its worst, back in the 1970s and early '80s, New York subway graffiti was so common that it was difficult to see out of the windows. As a former MTA transit president said, "When you're sitting in a graffiti-filled car, you don't feel safe." Today, however, train-car graffiti is rare. In 2014, the MTA bragged about  , and it   removing graffiti from train cars and stations. Indeed, the MTA is so strict about graffiti that it mostly refuses to allow graffiti-style ads for trains. As the MTA stated in a press release: NYC Transit’s commitment to maintaining a graffiti-free system remains as strong as ever, even extending to telling members of the creative universe a resounding NO when requests are made to "graffiti" a train or station for a movie, television show or advertising campaign. This latest ad seems to fall into a weird loophole, though. The MTA considers printed wraparound ads — like the one for  — different from spontaneously produced graffiti. And even with that exception, the MTA's staunch anti-graffiti policy remains in place. As spokesman Lisberg told  "The MTA’s position on the scourge of graffiti is unchanged: We will mercilessly eradicate vandalism to our trains, buses and stations anywhere we find it."   
 Street artist Smart paints a replica car in 2007. (Don Emmert/Getty Images) Now that the outside of subway cars are clear of graffiti, the MTA makes a lot of money through advertising. In total, ads  . The first interior and exterior MTA  , in a History Channel ad. It followed immersive interior campaigns that began with an ad for HBO's  . Efficiency consultants   to Chicago's CTA as early as 2005. The success of wraparound ads in cities around the world have kept subway cars covered with marketing material. Alternative revenue streams are important to public transit systems that are  , though an improving economy and   have helped with the funding crisis as well.   Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 