Stephen Colbert's riff about exploitation in prisons is great. But he made 2 big mistakes.
Get More:  , ,   But there were two big things Colbert got wrong: One of Colbert's cost-cutting examples — refusing to comply with the   — may not cut costs at all. Colbert names five states that are refusing to meet the standards, but there are actually  : Arizona,  Colbert says the states are rejecting federal funding for PREA, but that's not exactly true. They're actually taking a 5% hit to their existing federal funding for corrections, just for the privilege of refusing to work with the prison-rape standards. Kristin Hall, the deputy executive director of Just Detention International (an advocacy group that's worked with the federal government on PREA), says that it shouldn't cost states that much to implement the standards. "We've figured out cost-effective ways to comply with the standards, either reallocating funds or modifying training programs that already exist," she says. Hall says that preventing prison rape is ultimately a basic obligation for prisons. But it's also true that state governments that refuse to cooperate with PREA standards aren't doing themselves any favors fiscally. "The funding that those states are giving up, essentially, is funding to help survivors of sexual abuse," says Hall. "We think it's much more cost-effective in the long run" to comply. In a throwaway line, Colbert says that "It cannot be enough to save money. Prisons need to turn a profit." The implication: the problems with the prison system are because of private prison companies, who are trying to make money off incarcerating human beings. That's a common sentiment among liberals. But abuse and exploitation are features of government-run prisons and criminal justice institutions, just as in private ones. Every problem that Colbert describes in the segment is something that both private and government-run prisons are doing (or, as in the case of PREA, something being done by state governments on behalf of government-run and private prisons alike). NPR notes that court fees go to pay the salaries of county employees — and sometimes even their gym costs. Colbert is absolutely right that the bookkeeping in the criminal justice system is fundamentally backwards: it's trying to squeeze money out of defendants and inmates once they're involved in the system, rather than trying to save money by keeping them out of it. But when both the government and private companies are guilty, the problem has to be deeper than profit — it's a problem with the way that inmates are seen, or not seen, by the public. So segments like this might be the best way to change that. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 