Vox Sentences: A gyrocopter lands on the Capitol lawn
A member of the US Capitol Police bomb squad checks out the gyrocopter. (Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images News) A Florida man landed his gyrocopter on the Capitol lawn and was promptly arrested. Appropriately for a mailman, 61-year-old Doug Hughes, the copter's pilot, was carrying letters — 535 of them, for each member of Congress, pleading for campaign finance reform. The Secret Service visited Hughes months ago, tipped off about his plans by a member of Hughes's inner circle. "My flight is not secret. Before I took off, I sent an email to info@barackobama.com." Here are 40 charts that explain the issue Hughes was upset about: money in politics. It's tax time. (Andrew Burton / Getty Images News) Here are nine charts that explain how Americans pay taxes. Sweden, Denmark, and Spain all fill out their citizens' tax forms for them, but in the US, lobbying from the maker of TurboTax has stalled any effort to make taxes easier. How bad is American stress on tax day? Car accidents are slightly more likely to happen, and researchers surmise it's because people are stressed out. Forget what you've heard — the poor do pay a lot of taxes in the US. The "marriage penalty" on taxes disproportionately hits couples with near-equal incomes. And yes, if you're getting a refund, you technically gave the government an interest-free loan — here's how much more money you'd have if you'd saved it, invested it, or paid off debt instead. But still, Americans are much more proud of being taxpayers than you'd expect. Haven't done your taxes yet? File. File something. The IRS needs to hear from you. Eric Harris was shot when a reserve sheriff's deputy pulled his gun instead of his Taser — but Tasers can kill, too, and some experts think police are too trigger-happy. Police shootings are leading to more calls for body cameras, which would provide incentives for them to behave well in addition to evidence if something goes wrong. "Peel back the layers of most of the recent police shootings that have captured attention and you will find a broad societal problem that we have looked at, thrown our hands up, and said to the criminal-justice system, 'You deal with this.'" The shooting was captured on video, and for some, the most shocking part is when one of the officers yells, "Fuck your breath." The direct and indirect costs of gun violence cost every person in the US more than $700 per year, according to an investigation and research by Mother Jones. Former New England Patriots player Aaron Hernandez was found guilty of first-degree murder and sentenced to life without parole. Television has been preparing America for a potential Hillary Clinton presidency — sometimes unknowingly. America leads the world in making it difficult for the poor to get access to basic bank accounts. As more anonymous accounts of sexual assault go public, the more they're treated like blind items in gossip columns, creating witch hunts for perpetrators or doxxing campaigns against victims. "They want to know when her birthday is. Cheryl gives them a list of 10 possible dates." "Even if I have to drive to Lindström, and paint the umlauts on the city limit signs myself, I’ll do it." "She nicknamed the letters 'papillons,' in reference to the messages distributed by French resistance fighters during the Second World War." "Marco Rubio’s campaign logo looks like it’s for a discount lingerie store." "I’m your friend, and if I see a bus coming at you, I have to push you out of the way." Add your email to receive a daily newsletter from Vox breaking down the top stories of the day. By signing up, you agree to our  
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 