Read the horrifying racist texts that have prompted a probe of San Francisco police
The text messages Furminger exchanged with people, including other San Francisco police officers, use racist statements to describe people whom we can assume to be San Francisco residents the officers were charged with serving (in response to a message saying "all ni**ers should be spayed," Furminger replied, "I just saw one an hour ago with 4 kids"), as well as other police officers ("fuckin ni**er" was his response to a colleague's promotion to sergeant). Here are the messages revealed in the motion:   
 Government's opposition motion to defendant Furminger's motion for bail pending appeal. (via LA Times) A columnist for the   asked in response to the revelations, "Does San Francisco have a Ferguson problem?" It's understandable that some are more surprised about the possibility of a "culture of bias" in a famously progressive city like San Francisco than in a city like Ferguson, Missouri, where the Justice Department officials recently  that police officers and court officials routinely violated the rights of African Americans — or even in Baltimore, where US Attorney General Loretta Lynch   that the Department of Justice will examine whether police used excessive force and abusive practices. Despite that reputation, the racial disparities in criminal justice in the city are striking. Rev. Amos Brown, a San Francisco NAACP board member, told the LA Times that African Americans make up only about 5 percent of the city's population but 60 percent to 70 percent of those in San Francisco's juvenile hall. The Examiner reported that 47 percent of people arrested between 2009 and 2014 were black. San Francisco public defender Jeff Adachi told the LA Times that the city has "a systemic problem" with racism, saying that "this is not an isolated case of 14 officers." It's the type of scrutiny that's recently been applied to Ferguson, Baltimore, and New York City — the only difference is that this time it's been prompted by officers' own words, rather than by an unarmed man's death. 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 