Big Bird, dogs with PTSD, and 13 other summer movies sans superheroes
  Summer might be the season of explosions and superheroes (on the big screen, anyway), but it's also a time for counter-programming, with a ton of "other" movies launching right alongside the blockbusters. The warmer months are when independent distributors take chances on films that are a little smaller-scale and big studios try new things in hopes that something off-the-wall might catch on.   coming out this summer. Here are 15 upcoming and under-the-radar releases we think might be worthwhile, along with reasons we could be wrong. If you're looking for something off the beaten path, read on.   May 1 Thomas Vinterberg Carey Mulligan, Matthias Schoenaerts, Michael Sheen One of the few films daring to open on the same day as  ,   is canny counter-programming. It's got a female lead, it's set in Victorian England and thus appeals to period-piece fans, and it's based on a novel by Thomas Hardy — all things that are decidedly   true of Marvel's gigantic hit. To be sure, period pieces can go horribly wrong, but Vinterberg has been responsible for some terrific films, most recently  . And, hey, Mulligan is consistently great. So at least you'll have that going for you. It has  , where even the more enthusiastic reviews amount to, "Hey, it was just fine!" A Sunday afternoon out with your grandmother.   May 6 Dave LaMattina, Chad N. Walker If you can watch this documentary's trailer and   tear up just a little bit, you are made of stronger stuff than us. The "unseen person behind something hugely popular" approach is a staple of show business documentaries, and there are few people who fit that description better than  , the man who's been inside the Big Bird suit since   began. As a bonus, he also serves as puppeteer for Oscar the Grouch. Even the trailer struggles a bit to infuse some drama into the life of a man who found his dream job and stuck with it for four decades. But maybe a movie like this doesn't need drama. Being reminded that you, too, were young once and your mortality is inevitable. May 8 Henry Hobson Arnold Schwarzenegger, Abigail Breslin, Joely Richardson Movies that play around with the conventions of horror films are often lots of fun, and the zombie subgenre offers plenty of room for experimentation. (See also:  .) In this family drama, Schwarzenegger stars as a man living in a post-apocalyptic United States, fighting to keep his daughter — who is slowly becoming a zombie — from turning into a flesh-craving ghoul. Is it going to win Best Picture? No. But it's an interesting stretch for Schwarzenegger and a fun take on a familiar story. Man, the voiceover in the trailer sounds heavy-handed. Goth father/daughter outings.   May 15 Cédric Jimenez Jean Dujardin, Gilles Lellouche, Céline Sallette If you're a film fan, you may be familiar with the famed "French connection" operation — which smuggled heroin into the United States via Turkey and then (you guessed it) France — thanks to the 1971 classic  . This film isn't exactly a companion piece to that one, but it   tell viewers what French police and criminals were up to on the other side of the Atlantic. Plus it's a French crime thriller. How often do those land prime summer release dates? Most Americans know Dujardin for his work as a silent comedian in   and might be unwilling to accept him in a grittier role. Father's Day (especially if your father is Québécois).   May 15 Brett Haley Blythe Danner, Sam Elliott, Martin Starr For the most part, the love lives of older people are something American movies avoid at all costs. Hell, the love lives of people in their 40s are something American movies avoid at all costs. That's what makes this potential indie charmer such a find. Danner plays a woman wondering if she's just waiting for her life to be over, when she meets an elderly gentleman played by world's sexiest old guy Elliott. The film received  . The jokes in the trailer are hacky, sitcom stuff, no matter how great the leads look. Anybody in your life who owns   on DVD.   June 12 Alfonso Gomez-Rejon Thomas Mann, RJ Cyler, Olivia Cooke This film was   sensation at Sundance 2015, with its first screening attracting the kind of buzz normally enjoyed by Best Picture nominees. Those who   don't just love it — they want to   like a well-loved book and  . That's a lot of pressure for a story about two teenage wannabe filmmakers hanging out with a girl with cancer, but every positive review of   suggests it's more than its clichéd premise. Alternately, there are quite a few people who  . But isn't it fun to be part of a big argument about whether a movie is great or completely terrible? The members of your "Will Olivia Cooke die in this movie or not?" gambling pool. Magnolia Pictures   June 12 Crystal Moselle Another Sundance favorite, this documentary follows a family of siblings locked away in a New York apartment, mostly experiencing the outside world via the films they watch — which they then recreate with homemade props. The premise sounds either unbearably precious or horribly exploitative, but   suggest Moselle has done a good job of threading the needle to make a movie that examines the boys without treating them like strange freaks. If you're looking for a feel-good flick, you may want to look elsewhere. Anyone who wants to hear a true story, well told.   June 19 Rick Famuyiwa Shameik Moore, Zoë Kravitz, Keith Stanfield Yet   opening in June (because the indie film industry apparently hasn't learned anything from its older siblings at the big studios),   follows a geeky Inglewood teenager who dreams of attending Harvard. He's sucked into a wild night with potentially criminal undertones and struggles to uphold his reputation while seeming cool nonetheless. And all of it is underscored with a consideration of how hard it can be for minority kids to succeed if they're even slightly perceived as not having completely clean noses. This movie was also greeted with a number of high-profile pans amid the applause. Most notable is  . As Morris points out, it seems aimed at people who really love the movie  .   June 26 Boaz Yakin Robbie Amell, Lauren Graham, Thomas Haden Church While it's unlikely that   will be one of this season's best films, it's remarkable that it exists at all, not to mention that it's being released by a major studio like Warner Bros. See, the movie's protagonist is a dog. And not an animated dog. A real-life   dog. The hugely talented human cast is here to service the story of a dog that suffers post-traumatic stress disorder after serving in Afghanistan. It almost sounds like a family-friendly  , which means it could do very well at the box office. If the words "family-friendly  " don't fill you with anticipation, feel free to find something else. Finding something everyone in the family can watch over Independence Day weekend.   July 17 Bill Condon Ian McKellen, Laura Linney, Hiroyuki Sanada Are you not — after Robert Downey Jr., Benedict Cumberbatch, and Jonny Lee Miller — sick of Sherlock Holmes yet? Well, then, here's an elderly Sherlock to provide you with a little midsummer mystery solving. Truth be told, the presence of yet another Sherlock Holmes story would make this one easy to avoid, but for two things — McKellen, who is always good, and Condon, whose best movie remains  , in which he directed McKellen to an Oscar nomination.  is yet another Sherlock Holmes story in a world that has seen far too many of them. Anyone who opens their individually wrapped candies   too loudly in a movie theater, if you catch our drift.   July 24 Antoine Fuqua Jake Gyllenhaal, Rachel McAdams, Forest Whitaker Late summer is when the first serious Oscar contenders start to pop up. It's when  , for instance.   — yet another movie about boxing — wouldn't normally seem like a major threat for any big prizes, but for one thing: star Gyllenhaal seriously bulked himself up for the role, in the kind of physical transformation that sometimes indicates a stunt and sometimes indicates a truly revelatory performance. Oh, and McAdams is here, too, hopefully riding high on her performance in  . (That launches June 21 on HBO.) Another hyper-masculine movie about a boxer and the woman who loves him? There's no way   is as adroit at deconstructing masculinity as Gyllenhaal's last Oscar bid,  . The first public meetup of your bodybuilding forum. A24 Films   July 31 James Ponsoldt Jesse Eisenberg, Jason Segel, Anna Chlumsky Bringing a famous writer to the screen is always a risky proposition, and it only becomes more so when that famous writer is as beloved as  , the subject of  . But Ponsoldt's biopic of the   author gets around that problem by centering on a journalist profiling the writer, thereby creating a film about the celebrity industrial complex, how difficult it is to understand depression from the outside, and the weight of genius. Those who love this movie  . If you want to watch a movie about Wallace, it might be best to wait for a documentary or something, as   only uses him as a vehicle to explore its real concerns. Every literary-minded 26-year-old man you know. Sony Pictures Classics   August 7 Marielle Heller Bel Powley, Alexander Skarsgård, Kristen Wiig Teenage girls are all too often lampooned in pop culture, their interests and desires written off as laughable. That's why it's so nice to see a major movie (albeit an independent one) taking such a character seriously. Powley stars as a young woman who falls into an affair with her mother's boyfriend, and the film's 1970s San Francisco setting adds to its overall aesthetic. Reviews out of Sundance were  . If Heller nails it, this could be the best indie movie about a teen girl since the sadly underseen  .  really hated it. Anybody you can convince to see "the new Kristen Wiig movie." TriStar Pictures   August 7 Jonathan Demme Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline, Mamie Gummer This movie has: a) Streep playing a faded rocker, b) Demme directing his first narrative feature since 2008's  , c) Kline in a comedy, d) the talented Gummer playing the daughter of her real-life mother, and e) a script by Diablo Cody, who's only gotten more talented since winning an Oscar for  . (If you haven't seen 2011's scabrous  , do so now.) How is   not the only movie anybody is looking forward to this year? There are no good reasons to skip this movie. All Americans. IFC Films   August 21 Leslye Headland Alison Brie, Jason Sudeikis, Natasha Lyonne Everyone who saw last year's charming   (and there are far too few of those people) will know that the romantic comedy has left behind the major studios and gone indie. That makes this late-summer entry a particularly promising choice for when you're ready for things to just cool off already. Brie and Sudeikis play a serial cheater and a womanizer, respectively, and all you need to see is that description to know how   ends. But   the movie nails the rapid-fire dialogue necessary for this genre. You're still biased against romantic comedies because you haven't seen enough good ones. Date night. 
 
 
 
 
 