The war on marijuana is racist. So is the rest of the war on drugs.
The New York Times Editorial Board on Saturday   in favor of nationwide  , citing in part the racist enforcement of marijuana prohibition laws. It's true black people are   at far higher rates than their white counterparts, but the racially biased execution of   doesn't end there. Many drug policy experts point to the racially lopsided enforcement of the entire war on drugs as one reason all drugs, not just marijuana, should be  . White and black people report using drugs at similar rates, according to   from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.  There's some variance from drug to drug: white people report more often  using cocaine, heroin, and hallucinogens, while black people report more  marijuana and crack cocaine use. These statistics underline why critics decry the war on drugs as  racist. Although black people are much more likely to be sent to jail  for drug possession, they're not more likely to use drugs.  from Human Rights Watch found black people are much more likely to be  arrested for drugs. In 2007, black people were 3.6 times more likely to  be arrested for drugs than white people. Human Rights Watch found more than four in five arrests in the war on   drugs are for mere possession, while the rest are for  sales. That  suggests police are targeting drug users, not traffickers. A common defense for these types of statistics is that drug charges are often  used to lock people up for other crimes. As Vox's Dara Lind  , "One theory for this: I olice target drug enforcement in high-violence neighborhoods, which are overwhelmingly  ." Whatever the intention, the disproportionate arrests and incarceration rates — supposedly for  violent crimes that apparently can't even be proven in court — have clearly  detrimental effects on minority communities.   published in the journal Sociological Science found boys with  imprisoned fathers are much less likely to possess the behavioral skills  needed to succeed in school by the age of five, starting them on a  vicious path known as the school-to-prison pipeline. Drug sentences for black men were 13.1 percent longer than drug sentences for white men between 2007 and 2009, according to   from the US Sentencing Commission. That disparity has been mostly true throughout recent history. Black men  received 9.1 percent longer drug sentences between 2005 and 2007 and 9.2  percent longer drug sentences between 1998 and 2003. There was no  statistically significant difference in drug sentences for black and  white men in 2003 and 2004. Mandatory minimum sentences were established in the 1980s when  politicians touted the so-called crack epidemic to show off  tough-on-crime stances. But these sentences are set in a way that could  target black drug offenders more than white drug offenders. Take, for instance, the mandatory minimum sentence threshold for  crack versus cocaine. Someone would need to possess nearly 18 times more  cocaine than crack to get a five-year mandatory minimum sentence. Black people use crack at higher rates than white people, while white   people use cocaine at higher rates than black people. So the tougher   sentences on crack make it much easier for law enforcement to come down   on black drug offenders. Crack and cocaine are pharmacologically identical drugs. The  difference is crack is mostly smoked, while cocaine is traditionally  snorted. Smoking can make the effect more potent, faster acting, and  potentially unhealthier, but both drugs essentially have the same  effects in the long-term. SWAT raids are much more common in black neighborhoods than white neighborhoods, according to   from the American Civil Liberties Union. As one example, the ACLU mapped SWAT raids in Cincinnati between 2010  and 2013. The predominantly black neighborhoods are sometimes fully covered in red  dots, while some mostly white neighborhoods have no dots at all: The ACLU found that 62 percent of SWAT raids are used for drug  searches, and drug-related SWAT deployments primarily impacted people of  color. Combined, the statistics suggest enforcement in the war on drugs  hits black people — and their neighborhoods — the hardest. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 