Michael Brown's family said police should adopt body cameras. They're right.
Following   not to indict Ferguson, Missouri, police officer   for the shooting of   , the Brown family   for police across the country to adopt the use of body-worn cameras. There's a good reason police cameras are getting so much attention: if police officers were required to wear body cameras questions  about their conduct — like the ones that have arisen in the wake of    — could be entirely avoided. The devices are small cameras that can be attached to a police  officer's uniform or sunglasses or worn as a headset. Such a camera could have fully captured the entire confrontation between Brown, an 18-year-old black man who was unarmed at the time of the shooting, and Wilson. But without the cameras, the public is left with   from police and eyewitnesses about what, exactly, happened. Police  insist Brown was confrontational throughout the encounter, while publicly known eyewitnesses say Brown was actually trying to surrender before he was shot and  killed. The police car around which the incident took place wasn't equipped  with a dashboard camera, which could have also provided some hints about  what happened. But even that wouldn't have given the full story, since  most of the incident took place beyond the field of view of any  potential dash cam. At least some officials involved in Ferguson support body cameras.  Missouri Highway Patrol Captain Ron Johnson, whose department Gov. Jay  Nixon put in charge of security in the St. Louis suburb, spoke favorably  of the concept at a press conference on Friday. "I believe in cameras,"  he said. Jay Stanley, a senior policy analyst at the American Civil Liberties Union who's   about body cameras, says the cameras could benefit both the public and police by avoiding he-says-she-says situations and deterring police abuse. "They have the potential to be a win-win situation," Stanley says. "A  lot of departments are finding that for every time they're used to  record an abusive officer, there are other times where they save an  officer from a false accusation of abuse or unprofessional behavior." The major argument against these cameras is that they could be fairly  expensive for police departments around the country. The cameras can cost as much as $1,000 a piece. For a town like Ferguson, with  , that's at most $53,000, or about 14 percent of  
 put toward police supplies in 2014. Stanley argues that the cameras are worth the cost and could actually  save police departments money by protecting them against lawsuits. "In  an era when   that they don't need, it's silly to argue  that this important  technology that can serve as an important check in  society on  frequently abused police power shouldn't be a priority," he says. "The  cost of one expensive citizen lawsuit against police can pay for a lot  of cameras." There are also some concerns about privacy and whether police should  be able to record just anyone and anything they encounter, particularly  in instances when an officer goes inside another person's home. In  ,  Stanley outlines the types of body camera policies that could protect  people's privacy: police officers could be required to disclose to  people when they're being recorded, and the recordings shouldn't be kept  for more than a few weeks if the data isn't relevant to an  investigation. A big problem is these policies could, if they're tailored poorly, allow police to turn off body cameras during situations that would require the recording to solve a case. These types of poor policies would essentially put the issue back to square one, with conflicting accounts acting as the only evidence. Still, with a body camera and proper policies, it would be clear whether Brown really physically  assaulted an officer before he was shot, whether Brown reached for the  officer's gun, and whether Brown tried to surrender before Wilson killed  him. The question for public officials is if knowing all of that  information is worth the costs. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 