Follow Ferguson in real time with these 37 Twitter accounts
Almost every night since  If you want to stay up-to-date with all the events from day to day,   is a great place to start for news, analysis, and first-person reports. Subscribe to  , and follow the journalists, activists, and protesters involved. St. Louis alderman. That's me in the cloud of tear gas tweeting in  .  Reporter, the Guardian. Secondary standoff near the QuikTrip – maybe 500m north of where all the TV cameras are  Reporter, the Huffington Post. A bunch of reporters talking with gas masks on.    Reporter, the Huffington Post. Incredible amount of self-policing by protesters telling each other to disperse and calm down  Local protester. If you are still in and in Canfield, LEAVE. WE WILL BE BACK TOMORROW. BUT YOU MUST LIVE TO FIGHT. Host, This Week in Blackness. Here is the clip from tonight's live broadcast when the police gassed a residential block in  .    Reporter, USA Today. Protesters refusing to leave as police say everyone but media must leave  Reporter, the Washington Post. Entire residential section of ferguson is one ways and cul de sacs. Almost impossible to navigate. One reason "disperse, go home" is so hard Reporter, Los Angeles Times. Just saw at least two arrests in front of McDonald's, cops shouting at a crowd "KEEP MOVING!"  Reporter, KMOV. Violence started earlier tonight in   began about 8:30 well before the governors midnight curfew   is live now! Reporter, KMOV. Capt. Johnson commented on how some are critical of them using   Gear. He said it was needed overnight to get shooting victim  Reporter, MSNBC. Trucks roll up. "Mask Up!" "Get back!"  Reporter, MSNBC. Car driver offered to give a ride home to remaining protesters. Police stopped the car, guns drawn  Host, MSNBC. Riot cop to me just a few minutes ago: "Get back! Or next time you're gonna be the one maced." Multimedia journalist, VICE News. Earlier tonight an officer ripped my Press patch from my vest in    Reporter, VICE News. Hanging out at a safe space run by volunteers, where people can find food, a place to sleep & someone who won't point guns at them  Activist. Let me get this straight. Mike Brown smoked weed, had on  socks/sandals, shorts w/ no belt, weighed 295 pounds, ran 35 feet THEN  charged him? Reporter, New York Times. There's no curfew in   tonight, but the police are ordering people from the streets. Reporter, Wall Street Journal. Police-fired tear gas returned by a protester in    Reporter, NPR. The folks walking around with signs on Florissant earlier in the day are not necessarily the same folks who are out as it gets darker. Reporter, Grantland. They said it suddenly got "unpeaceful." I was in the first two rows. Didn't see that shit. Only heard stuff suddenly firing off. Multimedia journalist, KSDK. Spoke with an officer today who says she wears the shield and protective gear because she is holding the line, and she is a mom  Photographer and editor, KSDK. More police in riot gear join the front lines in    Producer, KDSK. Capt. Ron Johnson: "We will not allow vandals, criminal elements to impact the safety and security of this community."  Local rapper and protester. The utilities we use in the field  Reporter, CNN. DO NOT ENTER sign pointed right at the police    Photographer, St. Louis Post-Dispatch.  12 people just arrested in truck at Canfield, two pistols on arrestees & big Molotov cocktail found in bed of truck Reporter, St. Louis Post-Dispatch.  STL County prosecutor Bob McCulloch called me. Said Nixon replacing Chief Belmar with HWP Capt Johnson was illegal, disgraceful. Reporter, Riverfront Times. Meet Alfred. No gun, but whole truck of SWAT police surrounded him. "I don't have the spirit of fear, brother."  Reporter, Boston Globe. "MSNBC turn off those lights. You are endangering lives. You are spotlighting our officers," cop with loud speaker.  Reporter, BuzzFeed. Reporter, Fusion. Talked to Daryl Parks after prelim autopsy results were reported. He says findings suggest   was surrendering when he was shot. Reporter, Sports Illustrated. Police are apparently squeezing protestors in Florissant bottleneck. Again, we are not being allowed to document actions. Reporter, the Daily Telegraph. Police pointed weapon and me and Capt Johnson has threatened me with arrest. He has called squad car. V jumpy Reporter, Financial Times. . Media pen  Journalist, Slate. This has been the consistent pattern. Unilateral police escalation prompts minor response from more volatile elements, justifying crackdown. Historian and contributor to the New Yorker. For people who saw the Zimmerman verdict, it's a very hard sell that the legal system is capable of delivering justice in  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 