From Ray Rice to Ferguson, video evidence makes the public take abuse seriously
NFL commissioner Roger Goodell  that the league will start taking a hard line on domestic violence: first-time offenders will be suspended six games (more than a third of a season), while second-time offenders will be banned from pro football for life. There's one domestic violence incident, in particular, that spurred the new policy: in February, Baltimore Ravens running back Ray Rice knocked out his then-fiancee, Janay Palmer (now his wife Janay Rice) at the Revel Casino in Atlantic City. The casino's  Rice dragging Palmer out of a casino elevator, apparently unconscious, after the incident. Rice is far from the first NFL player accused of violence against women. To name two: Larry Johnson was   for assaults against women during his seven seasons with the Kansas City Chiefs — including a 2003 incident where he waved a gun at his girlfriend. (The Chiefs never suspended him for any of them.) In 2008, linebacker Ahmad Brooks, then with the Cincinnati Bengals,  when she tried to break up a fight between him and a neighbor. But the outcry over Rice's case was much more heated and sustained than it had been in the past. And when the NFL announced that Rice would be suspended for just two games, it didn't reassure the public — it just inflamed the controversy even more. Why? Because people had seen, with their own eyes, a video of Rice dragging his unconscious fiancée out of an elevator. This "seeing is believing" approach to incidents of abuse happens all the time. After Americans seem more likely to take abuse to heart, and get outraged about it, when there's documentary evidence. Without documentation, the victim's and aggressor's accounts become a "he said, she said" — and we know from  that people are more likely to believe accounts that confirm their prejudices. If people tend to side with the person they already know, like or trust — the police officer or the star player — video evidence becomes one of the only things that can break that impasse. Attorney Walter Katz, who works with police departments on use-of-force cases, said: "Experience has shown that it requires overwhelming evidence to disprove an officer's version of events. That's why it's often when video evidence emerges to disprove an officer's version of events that it leads to either criminal charges or some kind of consequence like being fired. It's the strong tendency of law enforcement that, if the officer provides version A, and civilian witnesses who may have been acquainted with the deceased provide version B, version A will be assumed to be the truth." In the case of Ferguson, it shouldn't have been that cops had military-style gear. It's been widely reported that local police departments have been receiving  from the military (and other federal grant sources). But police say their military equipment only gets used when necessary — when citizens are posing a threat. Without the documentation from Ferguson, the press and the public would likely believe them.   It's not that people don't believe that domestic violence or police abuse are bad things in theory. It's just that, without seeing it with their own eyes, they tend to assume that whatever's happening in practice can't really be  bad. When there's documentation, people seem much more willing to get angry about it.   
 An Al Jazeera film crew flees a tear-gas attack from police in Ferguson, MO. (Joe Raedle/Getty) But the Ray Rice video wasn't the work of a citizen journalist — it was the work of a Revel Casino employee who leaked the video to TMZ. If the employee had decided it wasn't his job to leak the video — or if he'd deliberately chosen not to put Rice under public pressure — the NFL might never have changed its policies, because the public and the sports media wouldn't have been so outraged over Rice's case. With abuse cases so often hinging on "he said/she said," it's left to chance whether people will see enough evidence to make them care. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 