The Justice Department will investigate the entire Ferguson Police Department
The US Department of Justice will investigate the entire Ferguson  Police Department for civil rights  violations, following   by Ferguson police officer  , the agency   on Thursday. The investigation, which will run at the same time as    into Wilson and the shooting of Brown, will look at whether the police departments have systematically violated the civil rights of local minority  communities. The Justice Department, through the the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) Office, will also help the St. Louis County Police Department change its policing practices, including policies and training regarding use of force. "The Department of Justice is working across the nation to ensure that the criminal justice system is fair, constitutional and free of bias," Attorney General Eric Holder said in a statement. "Ferguson and St. Louis County are not the first places that we have become engaged to ensure fair and equitable policing and they will not be the last.  The Department of Justice will continue to work tirelessly to ensure that the Constitution has meaning for all communities." Ferguson is predominantly black, but its local government — including its police force — is  . The racial disparities have fostered tensions in the small St. Louis suburb, which culminated in   that followed Brown's death. Other towns in the area suffer from similar racial disparities. The Brown shooting, in other words, is part of a much bigger issue with local police. At least five Ferguson police  officers, besides Wilson, have been named in lawsuits claiming civil  rights violations,  . Although the town of Ferguson is roughly 67 percent black,   from the Missouri attorney general's office found black residents made  up  more than 93 percent of arrests carried out by Ferguson police that  same  year. Under Holder, the Justice Department has initiated more than twice as many civil rights investigations on police departments than his predecessors did in a similar time period. At least 34 police departments are currently under review,  . The idea behind these reviews is to identify any systemic issues. As the Atlantic's   pointed out, the investigations have the potential to uncover systemic  failures instead of just singling out one police officer for what could  be part of a much bigger problem. I think this is a big deal, potentially bigger than just prosecuting one officer. Systems. Systems. Systems. The US criminal justice system in many ways disproportionately hurts black Americans. Although black and white people   and   drugs at similar rates, black people are   to be arrested for drug possession. And when they're convicted for drug  charges, black Americans face considerably longer sentences — in part  because sentencing laws treat crack cocaine, one of the few drugs more  popular among black than white people, much more harshly. The disparities explain why Holder's Justice Department — and   — are taking the issue of racism in the criminal justice system much more seriously. After decades of complaints, events like Ferguson have helped bring the issues to the mainstream. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 