Which states reduced their prison rates last year, in one map
Over the past few years,   and   governments have been trying to shrink their prison populations. Recent data suggests  But even the aggregate numbers don't tell the whole story. Some states reduced their prison populations in 2013, while others didn't. And much of the upward trend this year was caused by rising prison populations in a few big states — states that had been  , but fell off pace this year. The Brennan Center for Justice has done some analysis of the new state-prison data. They put together   that shows how much states reduced — or increased — their incarceration rates in 2013:   
 ( ) On the  , the map is interactive — highlighting information about what's included in each state's prison counts, and what isn't.  No state has a jump as dramatic as Arkansas'. But for some states, the surprising thing is that the prison population increased at all. Texas, for example, has gotten a lot of press for criminal-justice reform bills it passed in 2007 and 2011, and is often cited as a model by conservative proponents of prison reform. So it came as a surprise when the federal government reported that Texas' imprisonment rate had gone up 1 percent from 2012 to 2013. Again, the Brennan Center text gives a hint to what's going on: the federal government counts any facility owned and operated by the Texas Department of Criminal Justice as a prison. But some of those are actually treatment facilities for nonviolent drug offenders — what Texas calls "intermediate sanction facilities." According to Pew's Gelb, Texas doesn't believe it's fair to count those as prisons; the federal government does; they've been  for a couple of years. But the increase in Texas' prison rate in 2013 is based on the federal stats, which count the treatment facilities as prisons. The upshot: just because a state's incarceration rate rose in 2013 doesn't mean its prison-reform efforts aren't working — but it might. Texas' increase isn't an indication that the bills it passed in 2007 and 2011 aren't serving their intended purpose of reducing the prison population. But Arkansas' increase  because some of the changes made to the criminal justice system in 2011 have been undone. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 