The head of the DEA is still quite fond of mandatory minimum sentences
The head of the Drug Enforcement Administration at a congressional hearing Thursday struggled to explain her position on mandatory minimum sentences,  . As part of  , mandatory minimum sentences require that offenders convicted of certain levels of drug possession always get a minimum sentence of five or more years. But as part of   to reduce   in America and  , the Obama administration has endorsed   to loosen mandatory minimum sentences. When asked about whether she supports the Smarter Sentencing Act, DEA Administrator Michele Leonhart was vague. The Huffington Post  : "I do believe that mandatory minimums have been very effective in our  work over these many years, and we hope that we can maintain that tool.  On the other hand, I am aware that there are a number of initiatives  that are being supported by the attorney general to look at the bigger  problem of prison overcrowding," Leonhart said. "We support the  attorney general's initiatives under Smart on Crime," Leonhart said  later, in response to a question from [Representative John] Conyers [D-MI]. "And that includes the reduction of mandatory minimums, which is part of the Smarter Sentencing Act?" Conyers asked. "We  support the initiatives forwarded by the attorney general," Leonhart  responded. Conyers suggested there was "a certain contradiction between  your response to this question and other comments that you've made here  today before the committee." As the Huffington Post also  , Leonhart's answers on Thursday differed starkly from her more straightforward comments in May about mandatory minimum sentences. "Having been in law enforcement as an agent for 33 years, [and] a Baltimore City police officer before that, I can tell you that for me and for the agents that work for DEA, mandatory minimums have been very important to our investigations," Leonhart said. "We depend on those as a way to ensure that the right sentences are going to the … level of violator we are going after." Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 