Why No Labels is trying to take out moderate Democrat Mark Udall
No Labels   as a "national movement of Democrats, Republicans, and independents dedicated to a new politics of problem solving." Being nonpartisan is its whole purpose. But on Monday, Their preferred candidate, Rep. Cory Gardner (R-CO), has recently   a long record of conservatism on several issues. But the incumbent Democrat, Mark Udall, is clearly no blind partisan, as his positions on   and   make clear.    
 A March 2011 No Labels rally. (Tom Williams / CQ-Roll Call Group / Getty) No Labels was founded in 2010 by a   of connected Washington politicians, wonks, and operatives affiliated with both major parties. The group diagnosed partisanship as Washington's main problem. It   it would focus on building civility and common ground between the parties, and backed a series of   with those goals in mind. "What we're trying to do is meet the public demand for a more consensus-building style of politics," says Galston, who is also a Brookings Institution fellow. Lately, No Labels has been getting more specific on policy,   a four-point "national strategic agenda" that includes reforming entitlements, balancing the federal budget, boosting job creation, and achieving energy security.  , No Labels disclosed raising $2.8 million between July 2012 and June 2013 Initially, No Labels attracted many centrist Democrats, but   wanted to be affiliated with the group when the energy seemed on the side of the Tea Party. As the Congressional GOP became steadily more unpopular and confrontational over the next few years, though, more of its members became interested in appearing moderate. Rep. Cory Gardner (R-CO) was a prime example. In previous years, he had held very conservative positions on a variety of issues.      
 (MCT / Tribune News Service / Getty) When Gardner joined the No Labels coalition, he had already announced that he wouldn't challenge Udall this cycle. But several months later, in February 2014,  Gardner's campaign   this as an "endorsement," but No Labels said it was only an "implied endorsement" — one that Udall, too could earn, if he worked with the group.    
 Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. (Saul Loeb / AFP / Getty) "Surprise to say, Senator Reid wasn't thrilled that we decided to give our seal of approval to Cory Gardner," Galston says. "And he let a number of people know that he wasn't pleased. And it was an interesting period." Intriguingly, Shiner obtained an internal document given out at No Labels' board meeting that went even further. It appeared to argue that a Republican Senate takeover would be good for the group.    
 Mark Udall, at an October 21, 2014 rally. (Doug Pensinger / Getty) This week, though, No Labels dropped the "implied" from their endorsement of Gardner by committing resources to an actual get out the vote effort for him. The only other politician the group is doing that for is Rep. Ami Bera (D-CA), who's in a much less consequential House race. "Bera is pretty close to being one of our charter members," Galston says. "We feel a real closeness there." But Udall  , a bit of heterodoxy that doesn't skew obviously left or right. Galston put the blame on Udall, saying, "We've been in dialogue with Senator Udall and his office for quite some time now. And we would have been happy, indeed, thrilled, if he had agreed to sign on."  Current polls   a Gardner win — and a GOP Senate takeover — are likely. If they're right, we'll get the chance to see if a Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and Senator Cory Gardner would, in fact, usher in a new era of problem-solving in Washington — or whether the problems No Labels says it hates will just keep getting worse. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 