How political science conquered Washington
Perhaps the single best thing that's happened to political journalism in the time I've been doing it is the rise of political science. In 2005, when I came to Washington, knowing political science wasn't a legitimate form of knowing about politics, or at least it wasn't presented as one to young journalists like me But that's changed. Last week, t Political journalists always had an advantage over political scientists: politicians would talk to them. A PhD was nice, but if you couldn't get the Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee on the phone, what did you really know about what was going on in Congress? Political journalists admired the technical skills of economists and the inside knowledge of Hill staffers. But political journalists had better sources of information than political scientists, who  But over the last decade, the Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee became an unreliable narrator. So did pretty much everyone else working in American politics. If you spent 2008 and 2009 talking to (then) Sen. Max Baucus you would have believed that health reform would be a bipartisan bill. You would have believed that because   believed that. And he believed that because he had been close friends with his Republican counterpart, Sen. Chuck Grassley, for years. They would work this out. They didn't.  American politics is changing. Politicians are losing power and political parties are gaining it. A politician's relationships might once have been a good guide to her votes. Today, the "D" or "R" after a politician's name tells you almost everything you need to know. Political scientists traffic in structural explanations for American politics. They can't tell you what an individual senator thinks, or what message the president's campaign will try out next. But they can tell you, in general, how  , and whether independent voters  , and how  . They can tell you when American politics is breaking its old patterns (like with  ) or when people are counting on patterns that never existed in the first place (like Washington's  ). And so the more that political journalists heard from political scientists, the more they began to listen. Today the Monkey Cage sits at the Washington Post. Political scientists like Brendan Nyhan and Lynn Vavreck write for   at the New York Times. There are a half-dozen forecasting models trying to predict the 2014 election — all of which owe a lot to work done by political scientists, and a few of which are actually built and maintained by political scientists. Young political journalists I talk to know a lot more about political science and how to use it to inform their reporting than they did when I came to town. And readers are better for it. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 