11 poll results that explain the midterms
The midterm elections are happening this Tuesday, and Senate control, all House seats, most governorships, and many local positions are up for grabs. But recently, there's been an odd paradox in public opinion — people are both furious with the way things are going in Washington and bored by an election which offers their best hope of change. H   
 Lately,    
 It's clear to practically everyone that the current Congress is incredibly  . And    
 With Congress's approval ratings so bad, one might expect a general "throw the bums out" response from the public, hurting incumbents of both parties equally. This   from Pew shows why that might not be happening — people don't even know who's in charge.   
 ( ) Okay, so this poll is pretty silly, as my colleague Zack Beauchamp   recently. But it gets at the frenzy of fear that's dominated news coverage in these crucial last two months before the election. Very few people will cast their votes solely because of either issue.    
 The 2010 midterms were a huge success for Republicans, pretty much across the board. They retook the House, picked up six Senate seats, and won governor's mansions and state legislatures all over the country.   
 One silver lining for Democrats is that the Republican Party's brand is still pretty bad. Indeed, in the same   that gave the GOP an edge on key issues, respondents are far more likely to think Democrats care about people like them, are more willing to work with the other party, and govern more honestly and ethically. However, when it comes to who can manage the federal government better, the Democrats have suffered — the GOP has a three point edge on that question.   
 Nationally, Obama's approval ratings aren't great. The latest   shows his disapproval ratings 10 percentage points higher than his approval ratings. But in the 12 Senate states with the closest races — which include deep red states like Arkansas, Louisiana, and Alaska as well as purple states like Iowa and Colorado — he's even more unpopular   
 This year, Democrats are defending several Senate seats in deeply conservative states. The traditional way for candidates like that to win elections is to distance themselves from their parties by building centrist reputations, focusing on their personal connections to their state, and emphasizing their interest in working across the aisle. All this is aimed at winning voters in "the middle." But, as this chart from a   shows, that middle is shrinking, and the two parties are increasingly far apart from each other. That's made it    
   
 The demographic differential turnout in the midterms isn't the only problem for Democrats.    
 ( ) But, as my colleague Matt Yglesias  , that's the wrong response. States containing the vast majority of the US population will vote on governors this fall. Beyond that, there are many local races that, together, are really quite important in affecting people's lives. These elections matter — and if you stay at home, you might not like the results. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 