Midterm Elections 2014: 20 races to watch on electionÂ night
When the  results start trickling in Tuesday night, there will be 36 Senate races, 36 governor's races, 435 House races, and more to keep track of — a daunting task even for political aficionados who've been tracking everything closely. So we've narrowed it down to a list of 20 results that will really matter. S   
 Joni Ernst and Cory Gardner (Tom Williams and Douglas Graham, CQ-Roll Call Group / Getty) In Iowa, state Sen. Joni Ernst (R) has an appealing personal background  , she's attempted to moderate her image since winning her primary. Meanwhile, Rep. Bruce Braley Meanwhile, in Colorado, when    
 Greg Orman. (Orman for US Senate) The bizarre and unexpectedly competitive race in Kansas pits longtime 78-year-old incumbent Pat Roberts against independent Greg Orman, an entrepreneur.    Kansas looks to be one of the closest races in the country — the current   has Roberts and Orman exactly tied. More recent polls have given an edge to Orman, but it's hard to predict how his odd independent status might swing the results. For instance, his lack of a party-funded turnout operation could hurt him. Then again, his lack of association with the Democratic Party might lead Kansas swing voters to back him, even as swing voters in other states seem to be backing Republicans.   
 Dan Sullivan. (Tom Williams / CQ-Roll Call / Getty) Two Democratic incumbents in very conservative states, Senators Mary Landrieu of Louisiana and Mark Pryor of Arkansas, have gotten basically nothing but bad polling news lately, and they look extremely likely to lose. So Democrats' last hope for a deep red state survivor may be Mark Begich of Alaska. Polling of the race has been   — most models conclude that his GOP challenger Dan Sullivan has gained a small advantage, but Begich has had several polls showing him ahead lately too. ,   
 (Bill Clark, CQ-Roll Call Group/Getty) In mid-October, seven consecutive Georgia Senate polls were released showing either a tie or Democrat Michelle Nunn ahead — boosting Democratic hopes that they could snatch away this GOP-held open seat.  If neither major candidate wins    
 Sen. Kay Hagan (D) and former Sen. Scott Brown (R). (Bill Clark, CQ-Roll Call Group / Getty) Republicans are leading the polls in most of the races we've listed so far. But in North Carolina and New Hampshire, Democratic incumbents Kay Hagan and Jeanne Shaheen are still holding on to narrow leads. These races would make the difference between the great GOP Senate night the polls currently point toward and an outstanding one. They are the upper limit of possible Republican gains — and wins in them could give the party a majority of 55 seats and a net gain of 10 seats overall, a clear landslide that would make Democrats' attempts to take the chamber back next year more difficult.   
 Scott Walker and Sam Brownback. (Darren Hauck and Andrew Burton / Getty) Both elected during the tea party wave of 2010, Govs. Scott Walker and Sam Brownback enacted two different conservative agendas once in office.  Now, both face tough reelection battles. Walker survived a labor-backed attempt to recall him in 2012 but now faces businesswoman Mary Burke, a former executive at the Trek Bicycle Corporation.  Meanwhile, in Kansas, Democratic candidate Paul Davis has criticized Brownback's tax cut as irresponsible, saying it's led to huge revenue shortfalls,    
 Charlie Crist and Gov. Rick Scott. (Joe Raedle / Getty) More money is   in Florida than on any other governor's race in the US this year. But the candidates — i Crist quit the Republican Party in 2010 when it became clear he would lose a Senate primary to Marco Rubio. Instead, he   
 Martha Coakley and Charlie Baker. (Barry Chin / Boston Globe / Getty) Democrats hoped Martha Coakley, who infamously lost a 2010 Senate special election to Scott Brown, would turn in a stronger performance while heading her party's ticket for governor this year.    
 Mike Michaud. (Carl D. Walsh / MCT / Getty) Paul LePage is arguably the most far-right governor currently in a solidly blue state, and he's become  . Still, he's stayed close to a victory in  — because But days ago, Cutler  that his supporters were free to vote for other candidates if they didn't think he could win. If enough of them do so, Michaud would become the first openly gay governor elected in US history.   
 Gina Raimondo. ( )   
 Gov. John Hickenlooper (Kathryn Scott Osler / Denver Post / Getty) In 2012, Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper (D) was one of the   governors in the country. But when he and the Democrat-controlled legislature pushed through liberal bills on gun control and other issues, his centrist image suffered.    
 Gov. Pat Quinn. (Brendan Smialowski / AFP / Getty) For most of 2014, Illinois Gov. Pat Quinn (D)   he was clearly headed for a defeat. The state's economy was weak, Quinn seemed unable to manage the legislature, and there was a   into one of his administration's programs.    
 Wendy Davis. (Erich Schlegel / Getty)   , and she was always going to lose. But the outcome here will be noteworthy because of the Despite much media discussion of Texas potentially tipping toward the Democrats because of an increasing Hispanic bloc, there's actually no evidence that's taking place — or that it will. Davis and Battleground Texas hoped to start that trend this year. Yet the two most recent polls of the race show her going down in a landslide defeat. If Davis does perform worse than the Democrats' 2010 nominee Bill White, who lost by 12.7 percentage points in a Republican year, the activists trying to turn Texas blue will be rather demoralized. They'll certainly face questions about    
 Rep. Mike Honda. (Bill Clark / CQ-Roll Call Group / Getty) That looks to be what's happening in California's 17th district, where seven-term Rep. Mike Honda   
 Rep. John Barrow. (Bill Clark / CQ-Roll Call Group / Getty) John Barrow is the   white Deep South Democrat with a seat in the House of Representatives. And up Now, he's facing construction company owner Rick Allen, and recent polls give Allen a small lead. If Barrow is defeated, it will be yet the latest example of the geographical and partisan polarization that's occurred in the South and the Northeast.   
 (Arizona Republican Party via Richard Serlin) In 2012, after Rep. Gabrielle Giffords (D) was badly wounded in an assassination attempt, her former district director Ron Barber ran for, and won, her seat. It was always a tough district for Democrats to win, and it   after redistricting. But in 2012, Barber defeated his opponent, retired Air Force Colonel Martha McSally, by less than one percentage point. McSally is back for a repeat bid this year, and the race has attracted   — one of the highest for any House race in the country.  The contests for state legislature aren't as dramatic and high-profile as governor or Senate races, but they matter a great deal. The GOP's sweeping victories in state legislatures in 2010 helped shape much of the next four years of state policy, even in blue or purple states like Wisconsin, Michigan, and Florida. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 