Marijuana legalization 2014: Cities in Maine, Michigan, and more are voting today
You may have heard that   is on the ballot in  ,  ,  , and  , during this  . But marijuana is also on the ballot in dozens of cities and a US territory on Election Day. Here is a primer on some of the local elections on marijuana, based on the Marijuana Policy Project's  . Two cities, Lewiston and South Portland, are voting on whether to legalize the possession of up to one ounce of marijuana for adults 21 and older. The ballot initiatives also express support for legalizing marijuana at the state level. Advocates   to get a statewide legalization initiative on Maine's ballot in 2016, making the city measures trial balloons of sorts for a statewide effort. As part of a push across 18 cities in Michigan over the next couple years,   will vote on whether to allow the use, possession, and transfer of up to one ounce of marijuana. The initiatives would have no effect on state law, under which most pot-related tickets are  . Guam's   would legalize   to treat "debilitating medical conditions"  like cancer, glaucoma, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, HIV, arthritis, and  PTSD. A government commission would later establish rules and  regulations for how the marijuana will be distributed through  dispensaries. Unlike other jurisdictions, Guam already voted — and   show medical marijuana ahead. Marijuana will be on the ballot in many Colorado cities and counties for the third election cycle in a row. Voters in 2012   the legalization of marijuana, and in 2013 they approved higher sales taxes on recreational pot. This year,   are voting on whether to allow or ban stores that sell marijuana, and 12 cities and counties will vote on marijuana taxes. In California, regulations over medical marijuana are left almost entirely to cities and counties. Today,   in the state will vote on whether to allow medical marijuana stores within their boundaries and how to regulate them. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 