Election results 2014: News and updates on major midterm races
Most of the results from   — 36 governor's races, 36 Senate races, and 435 House races, not to mention the many   — are now in. Even for political junkies, that's a lot to keep track of. So here's a place for you to follow the results of all of the major races — the ones that are too close to predict, the ones that could pad out Republican control of the Senate, and the ones that speak to important larger issues at play. First, the big picture: Republicans gained control of the Senate. The GOP will have at least 52 Senators in the new Congress. It could have as many as 55 seats, depending on the results of close votes in Virginia and Alaska and next month's runoff election in Louisiana. Republicans also appear poised to slightly expand their majority in the House of Representatives. And the GOP won about two-thirds of the governorships that were up for election on Tuesday. This page will update constantly as results come in. Also, check out our   featuring a stream of news, analysis, and video from Vox staffers, and keep up to date with our  . Mark Warner (D) vs. Ed Gillespie (R).  : Joni Ernst (R) vs. Bruce Braley (D).  : Kay Hagan (D) vs. Thom Tillis (R).  : Pat Roberts (R) vs. Greg Orman (I).  : Mark Udall (D) vs. Cory Gardner (R).  : Mary Landrieu (D) vs. Bill Cassidy (R) vs. Rob Maness (R).  : Jeanne Shaheen (D) vs. Scott Brown (R).  : Mark Pryor (D) vs. Tom Cotton (R).  : Mitch McConnell (R) vs. Alison Lundergan Grimes (D).  : Sean Parnell (R) vs. Bill Walker (I).  : John Hickenlooper (D) vs. Bob Beauprez (R).  : Martha Coakley (D) vs. Charlie Baker (R).  : Sam Brownback (R) vs. Paul Davis (D).  : Paul LePage (R) vs. Mike Michaud (D) vs. Eliot Cutler (I).  Peter Shumlin (D) vs. Scott Milne (R).  : Anthony Brown (D) vs. Larry Hogan (R).  Nathan Deal (R) vs. Jason Carter (D).  : Scott Walker (R) vs. Mary Burke (D).  : Rick Scott (R) vs. Charlie Crist (D).  : Greg Abbott (R) vs. Wendy Davis (D).   South Dakota currently has a minimum wage of $7.25.   would would raise it to $8.50 per hour in 2015. In addition, it would raise the minimum wage for tipped workers (such as waiters) from $2.13 to $4.25 per hour. :   would allow adults 21 and older to possess up to one ounce of pot and maintain six marijuana plants. The measure would legalize production and sales, which the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board — or a Marijuana Control Board, if one is created — would regulate. The measure would also tax marijuana at the point of sale at $50 per ounce. :  would bump the state's minimum wage from its current $7.75 to $8.75 in 2015, then $9.75 per hour in 2016. After that, it would be adjusted for inflation.    would have required packaged foods with genetically modified ingredients to include the  words "genetically engineered" on the front or back of the product  "clearly and conspicuously." : Amendment 1 in Tennessee is not a specific restriction on abortion access. Instead, it will add a new section to the state constitution specifying that the document does not protect a legal right to abortion, even in cases of pregnancies resulting from rape or incest. : Measure 1, if passed, would have made North Dakota the first state to define life as beginning at conception. The ballot initiative would have added the following language to the state's constitution: "The inalienable right to life of every human being at any stage of development must be recognized and protected." :   will allow adults 21 and older to possess up to two ounces of marijuana, grow up to six plants, and give marijuana to other adults 21 and older. It will not legalize, regulate, or tax sales, because voter initiatives in DC can't have a direct impact on the local budget. : Here's the  , which has exemptions for animals fed with GMO crops and for food served in restaurants. Colorado's Amendment 67 would have added "unborn human beings" to the definition of "person" and "child" in the state's criminal code. This is a less sweeping version of the personhood ballot initiative that Colorado rejected in 2008 and 2010, which would have added unborn human beings to other parts of state law.  Currently, Arkansas' minimum wage is $6.25 per hour - $1 below the federal level. Arkansas'   ballot measure will bump the hourly minimum wage to $7.50 in 2015, $8 in 2016 and $8.50 in 2017.  The Illinois   asks voters if they'd like to raise the hourly minimum wage to $10 per hour in 2015. However, the measure is nonbinding. : Nebraska's Initiative 425 would bump its minimum wage from $7.25 now to $8 in 2015 and $9 in 2016. 
 
 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 