Republicans now have historic majorities in state legislatures. That's a really big deal.
One Republican victory in the   has been mostly overlooked. Yes, Republicans took control of the Senate and a surprising number of governorships. But they also won a record number of state legislature seats. Republicans now control state government outright in at least 24 states, one more than they did before the election. They control at least 66 of 99 state legislative chambers nationwide. And they cut the number of states with total Democratic control from 14 to seven — the lowest number since the Civil War.   
 . That's m   
 After the Newtown shootings, most new state laws surrounding guns  . Seventy new laws loosening gun control were passed, 49 in states with Republican legislative majorities and Republican governors, compared to three in Democratically controlled states. That's not even counting the less dramatic, more quotidian policies they decide: the age of the drivers on state roads; when and where you can buy beer, wine, and liquor; whether your local shops will collect sales tax, and how much it will be; and dozens more.   
 Then-Sen. Obama announces his campaign outside the Illinois statehouse. (Chicago Tribune)   
 Maryland governor-elect Larry Hogan has given the state divided government. (The Washington Post/Getty Images) Nevada had the most dramatic state legislature flip, and now has a Republican House and Senate and a Republican governor — so policy there could change, and quick. But Democrats' loss of control in either the legislature or the governorship in seven states is significant too. States led by Democrats are moving toward broader Medicaid coverage, stricter gun laws and a liberalized drug policy. They've legalized gay marriage, abolished the death penalty and extended new rights to undocumented immigrants. Republican strongholds are working quickly to remove government from the business sphere — reducing taxes, pushing anti-union right-to-work laws and rebelling against the Affordable Care Act (ACA). They're also pressing forward on some of their most valued social issues, promoting pro-life abortion policies and protecting the rights of gun owners. Seven of the 10 states where legislatures have approved   did so with Democratic legislatures and Democratic governors. Of the 39 state laws tightening gun restrictions after the Newtown shootings,  . This kind of aggressive policymaking on either the left or the right is just much harder with divided government. Divided state legislatures don't always lead to congressional-style gridlock. (And even single-party states with supermajorities don't always lead to flawless execution of a governor's agenda.) In states with Democratic legislatures and Republican governors, the governor may end up finding common ground on legislative proposals, says Nicholas Johnson, senior vice president for state fiscal policy at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "I don't think anyone really expects [Gov. Larry] Hogan in Maryland or [Gov. Bruce] Raumer in Illinois to simply get their way with the Democratic legislatures," Johnson says. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 