Is there a free-market solution to global warming?
There's a big partisan split on global warming in the United States. Democrats tend to believe it's a serious problem. Republicans don't. Check out   from the 2014 midterms:   
 But where did this divide come from? Do Republicans just have an innate distrust for scientists? Is it cultural? Did Al Gore polarize the issue? Maybe. But here's another possibility: Chris Mooney   an  suggesting that many people first tend to think about potential  to global warming and then work backward to assess the problem itself. So if you tell Republicans that there's a "free-market friendly" way to address rising greenhouse gases, they're far more likely to agree with the notion that . But if you tell conservatives that the solution will require government regulation… well, suddenly they're not so keen to believe that humans are responsible for climate change:   
 (Campbell and Kay, "Solution Aversion: On the Relation Between Ideology and Motivated Disbelief," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2014) And that raises a follow-up question:   there actually a "free-market friendly" way to address global warming? (One possibility is to do nothing, although   so far.) Or is the whole notion completely incoherent? Back in 2013, I   to Jonathan Adler, a law professor at Case Western University. He argued that there was indeed a conservative approach to climate change — the revenue-neutral carbon tax. There's no question that Adler is a committed conservative. He's one of the architects of  , the lawsuit that could end up dismantling Obamacare. But he also thinks global warming is a real problem. And he's   about how conservatives should address it. His   is that when people emit greenhouse gases, that causes damage elsewhere. Sea-level rise, in particular, is a big infringement of property rights — something that libertarians and conservatives care a lot about in other contexts. So doing nothing isn't an option. But he's also skeptical that heavy regulation will actually solve the problem. papers would be a good idea Here's his logic behind taxing consumption of oil, gas, and coal. The US government currently levies all sorts of taxes on people and companies, and many of these taxes end up discouraging work. That's bad. So why not repeal some of those taxes and replace them with a tax on something we actually want to discourage — namely, carbon emissions? Then companies can figure out on their own how best to reduce pollution, instead of being told by regulators. "It's funny," Adler said, "when I first came to Washington, DC in 1988, there were tons of folks on the right talking about how they wanted to tax consumption rather than labor or wealth. And a revenue neutral carbon tax that's rebated the way folks like Art Laffer or Bob Inglis  , that's effectively what it does. It shifts the incidence of taxation away from income and towards consumption." It's even plausible that Democrats might be amenable to this approach. President Obama   before that he'd be open to carbon pricing as an alternative to EPA regulation.   
 Rep. Steve Scalise (R-LA) is not a fan of carbon taxes. And he's the House Majority Whip. (Bill Clark/CQ Roll Call Group/Getty Images) Unfortunately, that doesn't mean we've hit on a magic idea that will suddenly break the climate deadlock and push Congress to address the issue. For one, most Republican officials really, really dislike carbon taxes. Back in 2013, Rep. Steve Scalise (R-Louisiana)   to introduce a resolution in Congress opposing the idea. "A national carbon tax would devastate an already struggling American economy, force the cost of gas at the pump to jump even higher, and kill millions more jobs here at home," Scalise said. Now, that said, there   a few conservatives trying to shake up the politics here. Former South Carolina Representative Bob Inglis   his fellow Republicans to accept a carbon tax as a climate solution. Part of his pitch — although he doesn't phrase it this way — is to suggest a form of carbon tax that makes Democrats uncomfortable. A carbon tax, he argues, should be used to finance corporate tax cuts or income tax cuts. It shouldn't be used to provide public support for clean energy, as many green groups prefer. "We have to be absolutely clear that we're not trying to grow the size of government," Inglis told me last year. He's still trying to sell the idea to the GOP — though there haven't been any major breakthroughs yet.   
 Solar tracker panels follow the sun's path May 17, 2014 on a Champlain Valley dairy farm near West Haven, Vermont. (Robert Nickelsberg/Getty Images) Meanwhile, Republican opposition isn't the only hitch here. There are also plenty of environmentalists and energy wonks   that a carbon tax alone simply won't be enough to avoid high levels of global warming. It would help, sure. But it wouldn't be sufficient. For example, while a carbon tax would likely reduce consumption of oil, gas, and coal (and make polluters internalize the costs of the damage they cause), it doesn't tackle many of the other greenhouse gas emissions out there, like methane from livestock and landfills, or deforestation in the tropics. It also doesn't   standing in the way of greater energy efficiency. A carbon tax also doesn't, on its own, solve the tricky question of energy innovation (which, to be fair, is something Adler has ). Do we currently have all the clean-energy technologies we need to zero out emissions by the end of the century?  . Will companies automatically develop those technologies if there's a carbon tax? Or would it be better if the government chipped in with R&D? And if so, should the government restrict itself to funding basic research or help with deployment too? Should the money come out of carbon-tax revenues? Things get messy quickly. There are other complications, too: Carbon taxes may be the most economically elegant way to tackle greenhouse-gas emissions, but they can also be unpopular. Australia   for a few years, and emissions went down, but many voters hated it — so it got repealed. Indeed,   by Jesse Jenkins has found that the public is only willing to pay so much for carbon taxes. That's why politicians often resort to indirect and clumsier regulations whose costs are easier to mask. So a carbon tax would be a good start, but it's unlikely to be the last word on addressing climate change. Which makes it harder to argue that there's an easy "free-market friendly solution" to global warming just lying around out there. And so long as that's the case, a lot of conservatives are likely to remain skeptical that global warming is an urgent problem in need of solving. -- Here are my interviews with   and  . There's a lot more detail at both links. -- How to stop global warming,  . This is the broad overview of what the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change says is needed to avoid more than 2°C (or 3.6°F) of global warming. -- Over at  , David Roberts   titled "10 reasons a carbon tax is trickier than you think." It's an excellent summation of the "carbon tax is no panacea" viewpoint. -- Michael Liebrich of Bloomberg New Energy Finance   on what a conservative approach to climate policy might look like. One big step? Repealing $500 billion per year in fossil-fuel subsidies. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 