The political upside of Obama's immigration plan
Before and immediately after Election Day, I thought the sweeping GOP win would   on using executive power to grant relief to unauthorized immigrants living in the United States. It's increasingly clear that I was wrong. The backlash against executive action that I was expecting to materialize from Senate Democrats hasn't happened, and the White House is prepared to move forward. In a sense, the depth of the hole congressional Democrats now find themselves in makes this case more compelling than ever. If the balance of power in Congress were close, then Obama could back down and 2016 candidates could promise immigration reformers that electing more Democrats would pave the way for comprehensive reform. But the GOP doesn't have a narrow majority in Congress, they have a fairly dominant one. Democrats have a favorable Senate map in 2016 and are likely to pick up seats, but winning the 5 or 6 necessary for a majority is a tall order. In the House, a combination of incumbency advantage and the   makes a Democratic House extremely unlikely. And of course, obtaining the 60 Senate seats necessary to overcome a filibuster is totally out of the question at this point. With the basic equation  looking implausible, the choices available to the party are deliver   or deliver nothing. Meanwhile, Hill staffers who believe in the political power of immigration reform point out that one of the biggest substantive drawbacks of executive action — its very tenuousness — is a political asset. What discretionary authority giveth, discretionary authority may taketh away, after all. If a Republican wins the White House in 2016, there will be no checks and balances to stop him from ordering the deportation of   granted relief by Obama. This dramatically heightens the stakes, not just for the immigrants themselves (who of course won't be eligible to vote) but for their friends, family, coworkers, and employers. Of course the higher stakes also involve higher stakes of backlash. But from the viewpoint of the party that benefits from higher turnout, the risk-reward ratio looks good. Executive action on immigration — like   before it — ensures that huge things will be on the ballot in 2016, even if legislative gridlock is baked into the cake. And for the party that has more trouble motivating its supporters to get to the polls, that counts as a win. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 