It's time for Mitch McConnell to kill the filibuster
Yesterday, Senate Democrats conducted their    Democrats' newfound obstructionist tendencies have provoked a bit of interest among the conservative commentariat in abolishing the filibuster outright.   is on board, as is Red State's  . Republicans would certainly be on solid footing, given that  , and all judicial nominations save the Supreme Court. Turnabout's fair play. But filibuster abolition more than just a fair strategic move for Republicans to make: it's a necessity. The filibuster is a horrible relic, an   that historically served mainly to   before metastasizing into  . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-KY) can, and should, get rid of it entirely. There's something to be said for the filibuster when it provides a means for Senators from large states representing a majority of the population to  . And a filibuster actually   would be worthwhile. But the actually existing filibuster, which makes no distinction between majoritarian and minoritarian obstruction, is a travesty. It has slowed the business of the Senate to a crawl. It makes parties gain the presidency, the House,   60 Senate seats to govern, which aside from a few months in 2009 has not happened in decades. Until the abolition of the filibuster for nominations last year, it kept the federal judiciary and executive agencies perennially understaffed. It's one of the   in American government that  . Well, the most recent majority did just that. McConnell should live up to his threat and abolish the filibuster entirely. That won't affect legislation much for the next two years — bills will simply die on Obama's desk rather than on the Senate floor — but it will clarify that what's stopping the legislation is the president. It will signal that these bills   become law if Republicans take the White House in 2016 and keep their Congressional majorities, because they   become law in that case. It will make the stakes of the next election exceedingly clear. And it will remove one of the biggest causes of  , probably for good. You don't have to support McConnell's policy agenda to hope he'll go nuclear. You just have to care about the continued functioning of the American system of government. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 