Jim Webb all but announces he's running for president
  On Wednesday night, former Senator James Webb (D-VA) sent a   to supporters announcing that he had opened an exploratory campaign to consider a presidential run, and asking for donations. Webb, a decorated Vietnam War veteran, worked as a Congressional staffer, and then in President Reagan's Defense Department, where he rose to become Secretary of the Navy. He   from that position in 1988 in protest of budget cuts. Afterward, he worked as an author and a filmmaker, and went back and forth between supporting candidates from both major parties. But Webb's frustration with President George W. Bush's war in Iraq eventually led him to choose a side — and he ran for a US Senate seat in Virginia as a Democrat in 2006. He won a narrow victory over incumbent Senator George Allen (R), helping the party retake the chamber that year. After serving out his term, though, Webb decided not to run again in 2012. In the video, Webb mentioned poverty and stagnation affecting Americans from the inner cities to the Appalachian mountains, while mentioning that the average CEO now made greater than 300 times what his worker made.  In a   with the New Yorker's Ryan Lizza, Webb elaborated on his critique of the party on economic issues: "There is a big tendency among a lot of Democratic leaders to feed some raw meat to the public on smaller issues that excite them, like the minimum wage, but don't really address the larger problem," Webb said. "A lot of the Democratic leaders who don't want to scare away their financial supporters will say we're going to raise the minimum wage, we're going do these little things, when in reality we need to say we're going to fundamentally change the tax code so that you will believe our system is fair." In the video, Webb acknowledged that he's facing  Webb is hoping that his actual record of bipartisanship, combined with a potent policy critique of the party, will convince both moderate and liberal Democratic voters to gravitate to him instead. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 