The Democracy Alliance: How a secretive group of donors helps set the progressive agenda
In mid-November, some of the wealthiest liberals and most important left-leaning interest groups in the country came to Washington, DC to talk strategy. They came to attend the meeting of the Democracy Alliance — the closest thing that exists to a "left-wing conspiracy" in the US. The Alliance was founded a decade ago, after progressive donors became convinced they needed to more aggressively fund and build liberal institutions to match conservative ones.    
 Internal Democracy Alliance document. (Via  The Democracy Alliance is a group coordinating grants from about 80 to 100 left-leaning donors who give large amounts to progressive groups. Closely tied to unions and many of the biggest-spending rich liberals in the country, the Alliance plays a key role in setting the strategy — and controlling the money — for much of America's progressive movement. Essentially, the group serves as a middleman between big donors and the many left-leaning groups that want their money. On one end, the Alliance narrows the long list of liberal groups that exist to a lucky few that it views as particularly important to fund. Then the donors (called "partners") pay $30,000 in dues to the Alliance itself, and give a certain amount which has been set as high as $200,000    
 Internal Democracy Alliance document. (Via  According to internal Democracy Alliance   obtained by   of the Free Beacon, between 2005 and 2013 the Alliance's partners have steered $381.7 million to its shortlist of 30 or so "DA-recommended organizations." These partners have also given another $160.1 million to many other left-leaning groups on a much longer list of over 160 other groups that the Alliance approves of but isn't choosing to prioritize fundraising for.   
 President George W. Bush, when his popularity was still high, on May 1, 2003. (Stephen Jaffe/AFP/ Getty) Stein argued in presentations to liberal donors across the country that, since the 1970s, a network of wealthy conservatives had funneled billions of dollars to building conservative institutions — from think tanks ( ,  ), to groups pressuring the mainstream media ( ). In contrast, while liberal donors were happy to spend in the short term on campaigns, there weren't comparable investments meant to build up new progressive institutions over the long term, Stein argued. So in April 2005, several of these donors came together to establish the Democracy Alliance to coordinate their giving with a focus on long-term strategy. (The Alliance's origins are extensively chronicled in Matt Bai's excellent 2007 book  .)   
 George Soros. (Mike Coppola/Getty) The Alliance keeps its full list of participating donors secret, but some key members have been known for years, and the names of several members have gotten out through reports and leaks. They include: Part of a chart circulated by Senate Republicans showing Democracy Alliance "core" groups and "partner and aligned" groups.   for the full version, via the Daily Signal. The Alliance keeps its donations secret, but many of its recommended groups have been reported on or leaked out. In particular, it has   million of dollars to the   — a liberal think tank closely tied to the Democratic Party that was founded in 2003 and now has around a $40 million a year budget. The Alliance has also heavily funded  , founded in 2004 to criticize the mainstream, media from the left, and  , a voter database company intended to benefit Democratic candidates. In a  , new Alliance president Gara LaMarche praised "what we have built in the progressive world during the last nine years, and what impact it has had." He continued: "Key elements of our infrastructure, from CAP to Media Matters to Catalist, have been built, virtually from scratch, with considerable assistance from DA partners." Another   to the Free Beacon in 2014 revealed a full list of that year's Alliance-approved organizations. In additions to those mentioned above, the Brennan Center for Justice (progressive litigation and legal strategy), America Votes (progressive voter education and mobilization), the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (a liberal-leaning think tank), and the American Constitution Society (a group of liberal lawyers) were also listed. Here's   of approved groups. The Democracy Alliance originally made only a short list of 20 to 30 "core" groups that its partners could give to to meet their yearly donation commitment. But in 2012, the Alliance   to expand the circle, allowing partners to meet their goals by giving to a much broader list of over 160 more groups on what it called the "progressive infrastructure map" — groups the Alliance approves of, but isn't choosing to make a top fundraising priority. Yet another document leak, to Politico's  ,   the Alliance's internal evaluations on how well each of its core groups met certain goals in 2013, as well as just how much of each group's budget the Alliance was responsible for (usually between a tenth to half).   
 Gara LaMarche, now president of the Democracy Alliance, at the Sundance Film Festival in 2010. (Clayton Chase / Getty) It's clear that the Alliance both wants to elect Democrats, and supports pushing progressive priorities of some kind. Beyond that, their interests can be murky. In  , Matt Bai wrote that the Alliance's original partners "didn't share any single, identifiable philosophy. They were united by their revulsion toward the Republican majority, and they shared a common nostalgia for what the Democratic Party had once achieved, but they had arrived at no consensus about the kind of government they envisioned next." In the ensuing years, the Alliance has tried — and sometimes struggled — to strike a balance between funding groups that tend to support President Obama and the Democratic Party, versus more "outsider" groups who want to push the party more to the left via criticism of the administration and incumbent politicians. These tensions came to the fore in 2012, when the Alliance seemed to be taking an increasingly partisan path rather than an outsider one, as the Huffington Post's   and Politico's   have reported. In early 2014, the group's new president Gara LaMarche wrote (in   later obtained by the Free Beacon) that there was a sense the Alliance had "become a bit stalled" and may have lost some "strategic focus." So LaMarche proposed refocusing the group's strategy on four major areas: This agenda seems to heavily focus on electoral victories and building a Democratic (and progressive) electoral majority, rather than on outside advocacy about liberal issues. (You can read LaMarche's full presentation  .) Many people of all ideological stripes feel some unease at the idea of a homogenized, coordinated progressive agenda dominated by secretive millionaires and billionaires. "All kinds of Democrats and liberals were complaining that corporations and individuals were carrying on these stealth campaigns to fund right-wing think tanks and advocacy groups," Sheila Krumholz of the Center for Responsive Politics   in 2006. "  the Alliance is from  : Due to an addition error, the original version of this piece misstated the total number of funds the alliance has steered. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 