Can House Republicans "defund" marijuana legalization in DC if it doesn't cost anything?
  
 A marijuana plant. ( ) The House Republicans' provision would block DC from using local and federal funds to carry out its legalization measure. At first glance, this might seem like a weird approach. DC's legalization initiative costs nothing; it actually   the district money to not enforce laws against marijuana possession. The ballot measure actually couldn't cost money in the first place, since DC ballot initiatives, by law, can't have a direct impact on the local budget. But the House provision would prohibit DC Council from spending its time and resources to approve the legalization initiative and send it to Congress. Under federal law, that's a necessary step for legalization to take effect. And if DC Council tries to pass a law that would tax and regulate the sales of marijuana, as Mayor-elect Muriel Bowser supports, that would also face certain doom under the House provision. A tax-and-regulate bill would cost money, and Congress could easily block such a bill through its budgetary supervision of DC's local laws.   
 The White House. (Ei Kebir Lamrani / AFP via Getty Images) Any action by the House would also require approval by the Senate and White House to become law — and   to the idea. President Barack Obama is a strong supporter of letting DC shape its own laws. And Senator Rand Paul (R-KY), who's   to take over the Senate subcommittee that oversees DC, told   that he's against the federal government telling DC it can't legalize pot. House Republicans are trying to get around the veto threats by sticking their anti-legalization measure in a larger budget bill. If they succeed, the fate of DC's legalization initiative might get lost in discussions about much broader budget issues — and that could doom legalization's chances of taking effect. :  . : This post originally left out the scenario in which the House Republican measure could block DC's legalization law. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 