Nigerian opposition leader Buhari wins the presidency: why this is a big deal
Nigeria is a young democracy. Since independence from the United Kingdom in 1960, the country has been mostly ruled by military juntas; civilian rule was only restored in 1999. Since then, no sitting president has ever been kicked out of power by an opposition candidate.  If Jonathan leaves office peacefully, it would be a major victory for democracy in a country where elections are often   by rampant vote-buying, as well as the use of political thugs to intimidate or even   rivals and to rig ballots. Jonathan's critics say it has taken him years to fully take on the Boko Haram insurgency that has largely caused suffering to people in the predominantly Muslim north, where Jonathan, a Christian, is less popular. Buhari, as a northerner, was seen by many voters as more likely to end the conflict. His supporters also say his military past would make him a more competent commander in chief. Nigerians are sick of the corruption that has spiraled under Jonathan — in one example of how bad things have gotten, the central bank chief admitted last year that $20 billion had disappeared from its reserves — and Buhari's strong anti-corruption message appears to have hit home. In 2011, when Jonathan and Buhari last faced each other in a presidential election, 800 people lost their lives in clashes between their supporters that spiraled into sectarian killings. So far, this week has been largely peaceful, but the concern of a repeat of 2011's violence speaks to the deep divides in Nigerian politics, which overlap along regional, ethnic, and religious lines. The result certainly appears to be a likely victory for Buhari. But the situation remains a tense one. If Jonathan disputes the result, or if his supporters allege they have been robbed of victory, there are very real fears that violence could break out. If it does not, though, that would be a good sign for democracy in Africa's most populous country. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 