The controversy over Shell's Arctic oil drilling, explained
This week, President Obama has been touring Alaska, gawking at melting glaciers and   about how global warming is an urgent threat that needs to be tackled ASAP. And environmentalists are ... not happy. Specifically, they're angry that, earlier this summer, Obama   to Royal Dutch Shell's efforts to search for oil and gas in the Chukchi Sea, north of Alaska. How, they ask, can the president say he cares about climate change if he's opening up fresh areas for drilling? 
 
 It's literally painful to hear Obama's powerful words from Alaska and know that they're so cheapened by his decision to let Shell drill This is part of a bigger conflict   for a few years. Sure, Obama   to curb America's fossil fuel demand — through new regulations on cars, trucks, and power plants. But, greens argue, he hasn't shown nearly the same zeal in restricting fossil fuel  . The government still sells publicly owned coal in the Powder River Basin  . Obama's wavered over  . And now comes Shell. The Obama administration, for its part, seems to have a genuine philosophical disagreement on this point. The way to stop global warming, Obama has  , is to zero out fossil fuel consumption by developing cleaner alternatives. But that takes time. And in the interim, we're still going to need oil. If we block drilling in the United States, some other country will just drill to satisfy that demand instead. Better we do it, with proper safeguards in place, than someone else. (That's hardly the end of the debate; more below.) All the while, Shell is  , drilling an exploratory well in Arctic waters. The company has set its sights on the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, which contain up to 22 billion barrels of technically recoverable oil. It's an audacious plan — and quite risky. Shell isn't expected to produce oil for at least a decade, and even that's far from guaranteed. The area features violent storms, massive waves, and drifting ice floes, making drilling treacherous. Previous drilling efforts have met with disaster. And worse, any large oil spill here could be a nightmare to clean up. So here's a look at why Shell is going to such extreme lengths for oil, why Obama gave it the green light, and how this drilling project acquired such outsized significance in the climate debate.   Javier Zarracina/Vox 
 It's not hard to see why energy companies would be interested in the broader Arctic Ocean. There's a staggering amount of oil and gas beneath those waters (by  , 13 percent of the world's undiscovered crude and 30 percent of its undiscovered natural gas). And as global warming proceeds, sea ice   in the summer, making more areas accessible. Even so, no one's really drilled in US-owned Arctic waters since a handful of exploratory efforts in the 1980s and 1990s. It's difficult and costly. There are ice floes, severe storms — and if anything goes wrong, help is far, far away. In recent years, Total, ExxonMobil, Chevron, ConocoPhillips, and Statoil have all put Arctic drilling plans on hold. So why is Shell persisting? For one, the company is facing constant pressure to add new oil and gas reserves. Reserves are what determine an oil firm's value, its ability to sell stock and borrow money. And as a company pumps and sells oil from its existing fields, it needs to add new ones. (Back in 2004, Royal Dutch Shell saw its share price plummet after admitting it had  .) But finding new reserves keeps getting harder and harder. Most of the world's "easy" oil has either been pumped already or nationalized by governments. So private companies have been pushing into increasingly unconventional territory. Deeper offshore waters. Extracting oil from shale rock. Or exploring the Arctic — which, for Shell's US subsidiary, is one of the few frontiers left. Shell had poked around the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas back in the 1980s, and its geologists seem confident that there's something there. What's more, says Tyler Priest, a historian at the University of Iowa who  , the company's US subsidiary has a long history of pushing the envelope on exploration — it led the charge into deepwater fields in the Gulf of Mexico in the 1970s.  Shell's Arctic foray got serious in 2008, when, under the Bush administration, the company spent $2.1 billion at auction to acquire leases in federal waters in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas: Shell's leases in the Chukchi and Beaufort (in orange) compared with other companies. ( But then things got ... messy. Conservation groups, local communities, and Alaska Native groups all sued at multiple points to stop Shell from drilling. They argued that Shell's preparations and spill-response plans were inadequate, forcing the company to propose fixes. Then, in 2010, after  , the Obama administration put a six-month moratorium on offshore drilling while it revamped safety rules. Shell finally got approval to drill exploratory wells in the Chukchi and Beaufort in the summer of 2012, but  . Early in the season, one anchored drill ship, the Noble Discoverer, got dragged by gale-force winds and nearly ran aground. Regulators then barred Shell from drilling deep into hydrocarbon zones after a containment dome, meant to limit the spread of oil in a spill, failed in early testing. It wasn't until September 2012 that the company was finally able to two shallow "top holes" (the first step in an exploratory well) in the Chukchi and Beaufort. And that's when things  went awry. The Discoverer had to give up drilling in the Chukchi after being menaced by a drifting ice floe. It later caught fire and had to be towed to safety. The other drilling rig, the Kulluk, worked for two months in the Beaufort before autumn sea ice started forming. En route to being towed down to Seattle for repairs that December, heavy winds and waves caused the tow rope to snap. The Kulluk was set adrift, the crew had to be rescued, and the rig eventually ran aground: On January 4, 2013, Shell Global’s mobile drilling vessel the Kulluk­ was seen grounded 228 meters off Alaska’s Sitkalidak Island. (DigitalGlobe/Getty Images) To make things worse, one of the rig operators involved in that season, a Shell contractor called Noble Corporation,   to improper accounting and withholding information from the Coast Guard and got fined $12.2 million. The federal government investigated and found that Shell had "screwed up" (as Interior Secretary Ken Salazar  ) and needed to fix its glaring safety issues before it'd ever be allowed to go out again. The company didn't even attempt to drill in 2013, and its plans to go out in 2014 were rejected. By this point, the company had spent more than $5 billion in the Arctic and still had nothing to show for it. Now Shell's trying again. In May 2015, the Interior Department   for Shell to begin work on an exploratory well at the Burger prospect in the Chukchi Sea. Shell had an updated operations plan, and regulators had imposed new rules limiting drilling to shallower waters and warmer months. ( Environmental groups were livid at Obama's decision to move forward, arguing that Shell   hadn't adequately explained how it would avoid further disaster.  Nonetheless, Shell was cleared to start drilling the top sections of a well in the Chukchi earlier this summer while moving more equipment into place. Finally, on August 17, 2015, the Obama administration   for Shell to drill even deeper, into oil-bearing zones.  So what now? Shell has until late September to work in the Chukchi, at which point it will have to retreat before the sea ice returns.  The Chukchi sea town of Shishmaref, in Alaska, has expressed concern over Shell's drilling and a possible spill. (Andrew Burton/Getty Images) Much of the controversy around Shell's project centers on the risks of drilling — particularly the possibility of an oil spill in Arctic waters. Modeling by the US government   that there's a 75 percent chance of at least one large spill (i.e., more than 1,000 barrels) in the Chukchi Sea if oil and gas drilling expands significantly over the coming century. If that ever happened, it could be extremely difficult for spill-response teams to get to this remote region. What's more, groups like Oceana   that many of the usual methods of containing an oil spill — booms, dispersants — may not work as well in icy waters. And, unlike in the warmer Gulf of Mexico, it could be tough for microbes in the Arctic to break down any spilled oil quickly. In a 2014 report, the National Research Council  that current Coast Guard resources "are not adequate for overseeing oil spill response in the Arctic." That report also pointed out that much too little was known about the effects of a spill on endangered species in the area, such as bowhead whales, polar bears, or ringed seals — not to mention nearby indigenous communities. Shell, for its part, seems to believe it has a handle on the risks involved. In an interview with Bloomberg Business, Ann Pickard, Shell's top executive for the Arctic,   that the company could have response materials, including a containment dome, capping stack, and surface booms, in place within 60 minutes of an accident. Obama also seems to believe that the new safeguards his administration has put in place will be enough. "We delayed [Shell's application] for a very lengthy period of time until they could provide us with the kinds of assurances ... if, in fact, there was a leak that far north," Obama said at  But not everyone shares Obama's faith in technocrats, especially after Shell's 2012 debacle. "Our takeaway from 2012 was that Shell did not appreciate how difficult it is to operate in Alaska," Michael LeVine of Oceana, who has been at the forefront of legal efforts to try to stop Shell, told me back in June. "Now, three years later, without any real public disclosure of what's new or different, we're being asked to trust the same company. That's why the government rush to approve these plans is so disappointing." President Obama speaks in Alaska. (MANDEL NGAN/AFP/Getty Images) Then there's global warming. Climate scientists   that we'll need to keep the vast majority of our existing coal, oil, and gas reserves in the ground if we want to stay within our "carbon budget" and   (say, 2°C or more). Given those constraints, environmentalists argue, it simply doesn't make sense to open up new areas to drilling — especially ones that carry so many other environmental risks. The Obama administration doesn't seem to buy this — at least not entirely. Officials   to take the view,   by Michael Levi, that trying to restrict fossil fuel supplies is like playing whack-a-mole. If you suppress drilling in the Arctic, someone elsewhere will drill instead, so long as there's demand for oil. That means the crucial thing is to reduce fossil fuel  by developing alternatives. But, Obama has also argued, reducing demand won't happen overnight. "In the meantime, we are going to continue to be using fossil fuels," he said in that May press conference. "And when it can be done safely and appropriately, US production of oil and natural gas is important. I would rather us, with all the safeguards and standards that we have, be producing our oil and gas, rather than importing it." Increasingly, environmental groups have been pushing back more explicitly against this argument, making the case that it's crucial to tackle both demand   supply. See Steven Kretzmann of Oil Change International  , including that developing new supplies of oil now further locks us into fossil-fuel infrastructure for decades. There's also the fact that organizing campaigns against drilling can help build political power for climate action in the long run. (An even longer version of the climate case against Arctic drilling can be found  .) One outstanding question is whether Shell was a one-off case or the start of a trend. Obama officials   that Shell was operating under leases purchased during the Bush years, and it would have been legally dicey to cancel them outright — implying, in other words, that Shell's project is an exception. But if that's the case, what will Obama do next?  A lot will also depend on future presidents. Would they auction off more leases to oil companies? Will regulators approve drilling plans? A Republican president (Donald Trump, say) would probably be inclined to green-light these projects. By contrast, Hillary Clinton has said she wouldn't have let Shell go forward with drilling: 
 
 The Arctic is a unique treasure. Given what we know, it's not worth the risk of drilling. -H   
 A Greenpeace activist covers the logo of the Shell oil company to protest on May 10, 2012. (Michael Cizek/AFP/Getty Images) It's also unclear whether other oil and gas companies would even  to move forward on drilling in the Arctic. Right now, they're watching what Shell does closely. If Shell has another misadventure — or, worse, a spill — that could be a major deterrent. But even if Shell succeeds in the Chukchi, that doesn't mean we'd see an Arctic free-for-all. Oil prices are currently quite low, hovering around $40 per barrel, which is deterring many companies from contemplating the costly Arctic. In her Bloomberg Business interview, Shell's Pickard   that oil prices would need to rise to around $70 per barrel or more by 2030 for the company's Arctic project to have been worthwhile. If not, then not. Ultimately, it all comes back to demand. If worldwide demand for oil keeps surging in the coming years and props up prices, then there will likely be a renewed push to drill in the Arctic. After all, as a National Petroleum Council   pointed out earlier this year, the US shale boom won't last forever, and the Arctic is the next logical place to look for further oil supplies. Conversely, if the world starts shifting to alternatives (electric cars, say) and reducing its fuel use, Arctic drilling will look less and less tempting over time. -- This Bloomberg Business   by Paul Barrett and Benjamin Elgin is an in-depth look at Shell's plans to drill in the Arctic. Note that the company believes in climate change, but doesn't think we'll be getting off oil anytime soon. -- For the case against Shell's Arctic adventures, this Oceana   is probably the most comprehensive, with a focus on the various risks facing the company, from spills to litigation. -- This three-part series by Alex DeMarban in the Alaska Dispatch News   some of the other challenges in getting oil from the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas, including building those pipelines. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 