Climate economists are coming around to the idea that a carbon tax isn't enough
The journal   has published a new commentary from a set of six (mostly) economists, called   It is notable not so much for the argument it makes as for the wider changes it augurs. The argument goes something like this: When I first read this, my reaction was, "Yeah, no shit." This is something clean energy activists and ( ) analysts have been banging on about for a long time. But I think it is significant. Lead author Gernot Wagner is a senior economist at the Environmental Defense Fund, which has championed carbon pricing since the 1990s. A few years ago, I would have pegged him as a pretty standard-issue climate economist (albeit a nice and very smart one), whose attitude toward climate policies that aren't carbon pricing hovered between disdain and hold-your-nose tolerance. In his   he argued, as many newly minted climate economists are wont to do, that economics can save the world, if only non-economists would shut up and listen. (Okay, that latter part is implicit.) However, his   (co-authored with climate economist Martin Weitzman) and the   commentary evidence a shift toward a more gimlet-eyed pragmatism. The book focuses less on the kinds of damages that can be quantified and plugged into economic models than on  , just as the commentary focuses less on blue-sky policy than on  , measures that can get cultural and political momentum going, judged not against a theoretical alternative but against the real-world baseline of no policy. In both cases, what we see is an economist grappling seriously with  , the trade-offs inevitably faced in a world where dangers are uncertain, time is short, and political change faces severe headwinds. It seems to me — though I may be projecting, since this is also my fond hope — that Wagner's evolution is indicative of a broader shift in the community of climate economists and wonks, away from arms-length purity ("we're not like those  , we have  ") to a more jaundiced but realistic engagement with the social and political forces that shape policymaking. It is a welcome sign. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 