The constitutional amendment that would overturn Citizens United, explained
This week, the Senate is debating a constitutional amendment that would give Congress and the states greater authority to restrict spending on political campaigns. If approved, the proposal would overturn not just the Supreme Court's   ruling, but decades of Supreme Court precedent on political spending, going back to the mid-1970s. Supporters are arguing that such a measure is necessary to help reduce the   of money being spent on elections, while opponents maintain it would hurt free speech and political participation.  Since 1976, when the Supreme Court has considered whether certain restrictions on election spending are constitutional, it has taken two main things into account.  The Court has ruled that laws capping how much an individual or group can   to a particular candidate are acceptable, because they help prevent corruption. However, overall caps on the amount any candidate or corporation   on elections are unconstitutional, because they muzzle speech without specifically preventing corruption. (The court's narrow definition of "corruption" has consistently been disputed by some justices in the minority.) So the proposed constitutional amendment specifically says that both Congress and state governments can limit the "raising and spending of money" meant "to influence elections." It lists several rationales for doing so — advancing "democratic self-government," "political equality," and protecting the "integrity" of the political process. However, it only says that "reasonable limits" are acceptable — so if the amendment is ever enacted, there would undoubtedly be court battles over which restrictions are reasonable or unreasonable. SECTION 2. Congress and the States shall have power to implement and enforce this article by appropriate legislation, and may distinguish between natural persons and corporations or other artificial entities created by law, including by prohibiting such entities from spending money to influence elections. In the   case, the Supreme Court held that the First Amendment allows corporations and other outside groups like unions to spend unlimited amounts directly on elections, rather than channeling their spending only through regulated and restricted PACs. The rationale was that limiting spending of this kind would mean muzzling speech. After the ruling, many liberals harshly criticized the idea that corporations should be able to spend money influencing elections just like people do. "If corporations are going to be given the freedoms that people enjoy, they should be subjected to people's obligations and restrictions too,"   wrote. Many c The proposed constitutional amendment would   reject corporate personhood as a whole.  Instead, the amendment states that when it comes to "spending money to influence elections" in particular, Congress and the states can treat corporations (and unions) differently than people, and even prohibit them from spending money at all. The amendment's logic would also allow   to be banned.  SECTION 3. Nothing in this article shall be construed to grant Congress or the States the power to abridge the freedom of the press. This is a pretty straightforward attempt to rebut concerns that the amendment would allow restrictions of freedom of the press, as Senator Ted Cruz (R-TX) has recently argued it would. (Cruz said recently that the "abominable" proposed amendment would allow Saturday Night Live-style political satire to be criminalized, Politico's   reports.) Still, it doesn't quite settle everything. Q The proposal needs  This gets at the biggest problem that's dogged campaign finance reform activists: the issue has become completely polarized by party, with Republicans almost entirely unified in opposition to more restrictions.  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 