Watch Hillary Clinton give the wrong answer to angry immigration advocates
As part of their "escalation" against Democrats in the wake of President Obama's delay of executive action on immigration, a pair of young unauthorized immigrants ("DREAMers") confronted Hillary Clinton at an event in Iowa yesterday, and asked for her opinion on Obama's delay. Hillary was initially enthusiastic about the exchange, but as the DREAMers pressed on, she got impatient; finally, she cut the conversation short by saying "We need to elect more Democrats" and walking away. Immigration advocates  with Clinton's answer. That's not surprising — in fact, it was possibly the most tone-deaf thing she could have said. Advocates are still recovering from the announcement of Obama's delay, which they saw as a crushing disappointment — and the latest in a long line of broken promises from Democratic officials. From  : Even several days after the announcement, the prevailing mood among immigration advocates was that they felt devastated, and betrayed. "When your supposed friends break multiple promises, it feels really shitty. That's just a basic human reaction," says Frank Sharry, the executive director of immigration-advocacy group America's Voice. [...] Advocates are taking the delay so personally that they're struggling to focus on how to respond. "It's obvious that all of us in the community, and working on the issue of immigration reform, need time to lick our wounds before moving forward," says Ben Monterroso, the director of voter-mobilization group Mi Familia Vota. Sharry adds that "a lot of community groups are really pissed and haven't figured out what to do about it." "Our position is that we will hold accountable people who stand in the way of progress. And sometimes those people are the president," he says.[...] "I think the DREAMers will do stuff that makes the Democrats extremely uncomfortable," says Sharry. "That's just their way." The reason DREAMers were in Iowa last weekend to begin with was because they didn't feel that Hillary Clinton would take the needs of their community seriously if they weren't there to raise the question to her. They were there   they feel "elect more Democrats" is the wrong answer. To understand where the DREAMers are coming from, it's important to understand that they don't see "hold politicians accountable" and "elect more Democrats" as opposites.   explains the way that immigrant advocates understand their relationship with the Democratic Party, and why they feel that Democrats need to start taking them more seriously. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 