What the Chicago mayor's race says about the future of education politics
Chicago's upcoming mayoral election could put tensions in the Democratic Party over teachers' unions front and center. Chicago Teachers Union President Karen Lewis is considering a challenge to Rahm Emanuel — a face-off between two brash Chicagoans who have clashed repeatedly over education policy in Chicago. Lewis is probably the best-known teachers union leader who isn't in charge of a national organization. She's been seen as a model for pushing back against education reform trends embraced by President Obama and Education Secretary Arne Duncan. Duncan had overseen a program to close failing Chicago schools and open 100 new ones, including many charter schools. When he was chosen for the Cabinet post, the president of the Chicago Teachers Union, Marilyn Stewart, said the two had a "working relationship." ly The Obama administration has pushed education reform nationally more than any previous Democratic administration. And while teachers unions remain strongly Democratic, they're also   at the national level. Political observers say Lewis and her confrontational style had an immediate effect on the Chicago Teachers Union's umbrella group, the American Federation of Teachers — which is now more likely to confront reformers than to try to find common ground. Randi Weingarten, the president of the AFT, had established a reputation as a reform-friendly union leader, even embracing evaluating teachers in part based on students' standardized test scores. "She has led her members — sometimes against internal resistance — to embrace innovations that were once unthinkable," the New York Times   in October 2010. "She has acted out of a fear that teachers' unions could end up on the wrong side of a historic and inevitable wave of change." But Lewis challenged the idea that teachers unions should work with reformers to find common ground. Under Lewis' leadership, Chicago teachers in fall 2012 overwhelmingly voted to strike — the first teachers' strike in 25 years. The strike lasted seven days and ended in a   that could be framed as a win for both sides: it preserved seniority-based raises for teachers, but established an evaluation system that took students' growth, as measured by standardized tests, into account. After the strike ended, Lewis and Weingarten co-wrote a Wall Street Journal   that lauded the compromise as "solution-driven unionism." "Heading into that strike, [Weingarten's] argument to her members was, times are changing, we have to change too and so we need to be at the table," Rotherham said. "Karen Lewis was the one who put a stake in the ground and said, no, there's another option, which is to fight." The other major union, the National Education Association, has also moved toward more militancy in its leadership. The new NEA president, Lily Eskelen-García, is universally profiled as blunt. "I will be damned if I sit quietly and play nice," Eskelen-García  . A Lewis-Emanuel race would crystallize the split within the Democratic Party over the role of teachers unions. But the race isn't likely to be solely Emanuel's disapproval ratings are at an all-time high: just 35 percent of voters approve of the job he's doing. Still, the mayor has $8.3 million in campaign funds. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 