Obama says "we have to do more" on climate change. So what would that entail?
So what does "do more" entail, exactly?  In his UN speech on Tuesday, Obama suggested the United States would come close to that 2020 goal — thanks in part to   on vehicles and power plants. (The financial crisis and US shale-gas boom pushing out coal deserve credit, too.) Obama also mentioned a few smaller recent US actions to nudge emissions down further and address the impacts of global warming. Like: The world's leaders   that they want to avoid more than 2°C (or 3.6°F) of global warming. Go above that, the thinking goes, and we run unacceptable risks from sea-level rise, extreme weather, crop failures, and so on. ( The world isn't doing nearly enough right now to meet its own climate goals. Emissions in the United States and Europe are falling slightly, but   in less-developed countries like China and India:   
 Now, there are a lot of ways to divvy up the blame here. The United States and Europe can say they're already taking  action, but now countries like China and India need to do more to curtail emissions. ("Nobody gets a pass," is how Obama put it in his speech, and added that the US and China have "a special responsibility to lead" as the two biggest emitters.) For their part, developing countries like India often retort that wealthy countries have been enjoying the growth benefits of using cheaper fossil fuels for over a century now. Indeed, half the man-made carbon-dioxide that's currently in the atmosphere   by the United States and Europe. So those richer countries should be doing much, much more than they already are — America's modest 17 percent cut isn't nearly sufficient — and give developing countries more room to grow. This is   in global climate politics, and no one seems to have figured out how to solve it — not the Obama administration, not anyone. For now, Obama is mostly emphasizing the incremental progress that the United States has made on emissions and urging other countries to do likewise. But no politician has yet come up with a concrete plan to stay below 2°C of global warming. "We have to raise our collective ambition," Obama said of the next climate pact. "It must be ambitious because that is what the challenge demands." So what would "raising our collective ambition" actually look like? It would likely involve drastic changes to our energy system — changes that go far, far beyond any of the incremental policy measures Obama discussed in his speech. One   on "deep decarbonization" found that the world's 15 largest economies would have to cut their emissions   in the next four decades if the world wanted to avoid 2°C of warming. That would mean the average person worldwide could emit no more than 1.6 tons of carbon per year by 2050 — less than one-tenth of what the average American currently emits. ( ) In the United States, the report noted, that might mean getting 30 percent of our electricity from nuclear power and 40 percent from renewable sources like hydro, wind, and solar by 2050. Electric vehicles would need to handle about 75 percent of all trips. The coal plants that remained would all capture their carbon-dioxide emissions and bury them underground. The UN report noted that a shift this wrenching was technologically feasible — though it becomes far more expensive if we rule out specific technologies, like nuclear or carbon capture for coal. (Another recent report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change   of this sort of massive clean-energy shift at about 0.06 percentage points of growth per year, but  if all the technologies worked out well.) In the United States, changes this big would likely require further legislation. But at the moment, virtually all Republicans and even many Democrats in Congress are unwilling anything to address climate change. The only things happening right now are incremental executive actions and speeches at the UN. 7 charts   why UN climate talks keep breaking down Here's what the world   if we took global warming seriously A   at the 2°C climate target Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 