The fatal flaw in Obama's plan to let unauthorized immigrants into the military
On Thursday, the  that it was going to allow unauthorized immigrants who have already been protected from deportation (under the   to serve in the military. The announcement was something that some young unauthorized immigrants, or DREAMers, have been waiting to hear for years. They'd been frustrated that, since 2012, many of them had been able to work legally in the US under DACA, but hadn't been able to serve in the armed forces. And they'd gotten their hopes up when   that the administration was going to allow them to serve — only to have the administration  less than a day later. But when it comes to the details, it turns out the administration's move will, in a best-case scenario, only affect a very limited number of DREAMers — an estimated "few dozen," in the words of one leading advocate. And that's, again, the best-case scenario. In the worst-case scenario, a catch-22 could make it impossible for any DACA recipient to enlist under the new program at all. What the Obama administration is doing is expanding an existing program for certain types of immigrants: the Military Accessions Vital to the National Interest program, or MAVNI. There are "DACAmented" immigrants who have expertise in an uncommon language, or want to go into health care. But medical colleges have only started accepting them, meaning that no DACAmented immigrant will have the medical degree needed for MAVNI for several years. And it's not clear at all how many of the DACAmented immigrants who   in the military will qualify through the language requirement. Cesar Vargas of DRM Action Coalition, who's been the most visible "military DREAMer" since he "came out" as unauthorized in 2010, said that of all the would-be immigrant service members he's in touch with, he only knows of two people who could be eligible for MAVNI under the current restrictions. Having the skills for the program is, relatively speaking, the easy part. The hard part is that the military places restrictions on anyone — even a US citizen — who has any unauthorized immigrants in his or her family.  As of 2012, the requirements for enlisting under MAVNI include what's called a "Single Scope Background Investigation," or SSBI — an investigation used throughout the government, usually to give people security clearances. And according to Stock, it's impossible for an unauthorized immigrant, with or without temporary "deferred action" protection, to pass an SSBI. "SSBI items that cause 'failure' include having undocumented relatives, as well as any 'law violations'," Stock writes in an email to Vox. "I don't see how any DACA can 'pass' unless the contractor doing the investigation ignores his or her instructions." For all of these reasons, many of the politicians and advocates who had been asking Obama to allow DREAMers to serve in the military are taking the news as a defeat. Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-IL), the biggest supporter of executive action on immigration in Congress, released a statement Thursday saying that the administration has "decided not to let DACA recipients enlist in the military except in very limited circumstances." And United We Dream, one of the leading DREAMer advocacy groups, titled  "Nice Try." Gutierrez' statement floated one possibility: "Maybe after the season of midterm elections passes and the Obama Administration makes a top-to-bottom review of its immigration policies and its ability to make adjustments under current law this matter will be revisited." That suggests that Gutierrez and advocates aren't giving the administration any credit for making this move before the midterms. And it suggests that the advocates and Latinos who are waiting for the administration to do something really big on immigration aren't going to stop holding their breath. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 