Pictures of black voters make whites more likely to support voter ID laws
The researchers found that black and Hispanic respondents were about equally likely to support or oppose the laws regardless of who was featured in the picture. And white respondents were as likely to support the law when they saw a picture of a white voter as they were when they saw no picture at all. But when the picture alongside the question showed a black voter, more whites supported voter ID:   
 ( ) The study isn't too surprising.   has shown that whites are more likely to support harsh criminal justice policies, like stop-and-frisk, when they see images of or hear statistics about black prisoners. And voter ID is like stop-and-frisk in one important respect: it's a race-neutral policy in theory, but in practice it ends up disproportionately harming people of color. A 2012 report by the Brennan Center for Justice found that African Americans and Hispanics were generally less likely to have ID than the average American, meaning that the burden of getting a new ID after a state law passed falls heavily on them. Compounding that, people of color are disproportionately unlikely to have easy access to state offices where they can obtain IDs: 1.2 million eligible black voters and 500,000 eligible Hispanic voters live more than 10 miles from their nearest ID-issuing office open more than two days a week. People of color are more likely to be disenfranchised by these laws since they are less likely to have photo ID than the general population...(In some of the states with strict voter-ID laws), many part-time ID-issuing offices are in the rural regions with the highest concentrations of people of color and people in poverty.   
 ( ) If the last week is any indication, voter ID opponents might be winning in the courts — at least in the long run. Last week, a federal judge in Texas ruled against their voter ID law — saying that it "constitutes an unconstitutional poll tax" on black and Hispanic voters. Texas appealed, and an   that the law will be allowed to go into effect. But the appeals court didn't necessarily disagree with or overrule the lower court's ruling — it just said that because the election is coming up so soon in Texas, it was better to keep the law in effect for now. After the election, the appeals court will take up the question of what to do with the law for good. And according to  , the ruling that struck the law down last week could serve another purpose, too. The earlier ruling helps make the case that Texas can't be trusted to make non-discriminatory voting laws on its own, and therefore needs to go back to getting preclearance — a permission slip, essentially — from the federal government before it can make any voting changes. (In 2013, the Supreme Court gutted the portion of the Voting Rights Act that mandated such a permission slip for  , including Texas, with a history of discrimination.) . As there is no evidence that voter impersonation fraud is a problem, how can the fact that a legislature says it's a problem turn it into one? If the Wisconsin legislature says witches are a problem, shall Wisconsin courts be permitted to conduct witch trials? If the Supreme Court once thought that requiring photo identification increases public confidence in elections, and experience and academic study since shows that the Court was mistaken, do we do a favor to the Court — do we increase public confidence in elections — by making the mistake a premise of our decision? In another passage, Posner sums up the paradox behind support for voter ID: it ignores, or tries to make excuses for, the real problem of discouraging people from voting legally, in service of trying to fix the imaginary problem of voter fraud. The panel opinion states that "if photo ID is available to people willing to scrounge up a birth certificate and stand in line at  the office that issues driver's licenses,  then  all we  know  from  the fact  that  a particular person lacks  a photo  ID is  that he was unwilling to invest the necessary time." But that ignores Sobel's study, discussed earlier, and the broader point that time is cost. The author of this dissenting opinion has never seen his birth certificate and does not  know how he would go about "scrounging" it up. Nor does he enjoy waiting in line at  motor  vehicle  bureaus.   This story was first posted before a federal appeals court ruled to let Texas use its voter ID law in the 2014 elections. It's been updated to reflect the most recent ruling. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 