Ohio's GOP governor says Obamacare is helping people, then rapidly retreats
On Monday, Governor John Kasich of Ohio appeared, for a few brief hours, to have lavishly praised    , characterized opposition to it as "ideological," and admitted it won't be repealed. But a few hours later, his office issued a clarification, and said Kasich was referring to only   of Obamacare.  Kasich doesn't think the Affordable Care Act will be repealed, even if Republicans win a Senate majority and consolidate their hold on the House in next month's election. "That's not gonna happen," Kasich told The Associated Press during a recent re-election campaign swing.  Soon afterward, a Kasich staffer told   of Cleveland.com that Kasich's praise was only intended to refer to the law's  , and that Kasich still wants to repeal and replace the health law as a whole. A few hours later, Kasich reaffirmed this in  . But once elected, and after the Supreme Court upheld most of the law, Kasich embraced Obamacare's expansion of Medicaid in what t KASICH: "The most-important thing for this legislature to think about: Put yourself in somebody else's shoes. Put yourself in the shoes of a mother and a father of an adult child that is struggling. Walk in somebody else's moccasins. Understand that poverty is real. I had a conversation with one of the members of the legislature the other day. I said, ‘I respect the fact that you believe in small government. I do, too. I also know that you're a person of faith. ‘Now, when you die and get to the meeting with St. Peter, he's probably not going to ask you much about what you did about keeping government small. But he is going to ask you what you did for the poor. You better have a good answer.'  " When the legislature refused to expand Medicaid, Kasich decided to bypass them, implementing the Medicaid expansion with only the authority of a special legislative panel. Conservative activists sued, calling Kasich's maneuver illegal, but the Ohio Supreme Court   it last December in a 4-3 decision, and Medicaid was expanded in Ohio. Kasich is on his way to a landslide reelection, and has sometimes been mentioned as a potential 2016 contender. If he does run, his praise of Obamacare seems somewhat out of step with his current rivals, and the beliefs of activists and interest groups pushing hard-line fiscal conservatism. But it does resemble  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 