This high-tech football could change the NFL
  
 The Magneto-Track system's ball. ( ) The Super Bowl will feature all sorts of high-tech innovations: instant replay and Surface tablets on the sidelines, overhead cameras that crawl across cables to follow players on the field, and helmets with radios built in so coaches can easily relay plays from the sideline. Then, every so often, a pair of men will trot on to the field with a 10-yard-long metal chain to try to figure out if the offense got a first down — just like they did  . Some engineers think so. The chain might seem precise, but it really isn't: researchers have determined that it has a roughly  , largely due to human error in placing the ball and perfectly aligning the sideline chain with it afterward.  is the answer. The system involves So far, it's been used in practice by the  Some other sports —   — have already implemented ball-tracking technologies that  .  This would also prevent the use of RFID or GPS technologies. "We had to look for a technology that would allow us to use radio waves that would be transparent to players' bodies," The ball's transmitter generates a magnetic field, which is picked up by a series of antennas edging the field.  The system can calculate all this in real-time — so, theoretically, it could supplement instant replay as a way for a ref to determine whether the ball crossed the goal line before a player's knee hit the ground. The main problem: right now, it still has a  , which is larger than the chain's. But the researchers are working to cut down on it, and it could soon become the most accurate way to figure out if a player got a first down or scored a touchdown. One concern might be that putting a magnetic transmitter in a football would alter its weight or balance. But when it comes to weight, a football is surprisingly forgiving. Additionally, footballs are naturally lopsided because of the laces, so manufacturers already need to put a small weight on the side  Here's a video of a transmitter being put into a finished ball — but keep in mind that if this type of system were adopted, it could be incorporated into the actual manufacturing process. The engineers developed this  . Not coincidentally, Disney owns ESPN. The researchers initially envisioned this simply as a way to let TV viewers   at home, like the   experiment during the 90's. But it could have other uses. One is to provide coaches with detailed analytics data, during both games and practice. It can, for instance, provide a quarterback's throwing speed and trajectory on every single pass. And it might take a while, but it's easy to imagine a pathway to it actually being used to help refs call a game. At first, ESPN might convince the NFL to let transmitters into their balls solely for broadcast and analytics purposes — likely in preseason games to start. But eventually, the system could be used as a supplement to instant replay. It might even someday supplant replace the chain — and NFL officials   that they'd like a more precise replacement for it. This isn't the first one imagined: inventors have suggested all sorts of contraptions, including, most recently,  . But these only solve part of the problem — they would enable refs to line up the markers accurately with the ball, but wouldn't help them better determine exactly where a player actually went down.  Sure, the NFL can sometimes prefer to stick with tradition. But it's also shown a willingness to adopt technology when it can obviously improve the game. In 1986, the league adopted instant replay review, then abandoned it in 1989  , and that even when they used it, refs still got calls wrong. But in 1999, it tried out replay once again, this time with vastly improved cameras. It's since become a core part of football, and this year, the NFL   with an even bigger shift: it now gives officials sitting in its New York offices a good deal of power over calls, rather than solely the refs on the field. Obviously, this magnetic system needs to improve further before it's even a possibility. But here's hoping that if the NFL still exists in 50 years, it's not still having refs run out onto the field with a chain. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 