The Bachelor's Chris Soules is getting less wealthy every day. Here's why.
Chris Soules, the star of the latest season of the Bachelor, is just a modest Iowa farmer, seeking love from a pool of inordinately gorgeous women. And apparently, he's also pretty rich ... but if he's like any other Iowa land-owning farmer, his net worth has been falling fast. There aren't a lot of details out there about exactly how wealthy Soules is, but it is known that   a "millionaire" (the closest thing to a real estimate comes from  , which puts him at $1.5 million). Either way, as the   writes, he's a "fourth-generation land baron" (and a quick search of Iowa's   also shows his name on more than a few mortgages). Being an Iowa land-owner these days means your investment has lost value remarkably quickly. In 2014, the value of Iowa cropland slid by 8.9 percent, its fastest decline in 28 years, as the   reported in December. That's happening because commodity prices are plummeting after a meteoric rise in the last few years. Ethanol, drought, and increased   for corn (in the form of corn-fed animals) were just a few factors that drove corn prices sky-high. But thanks in part to bumper crops this year, corn prices are falling — and as corn prices go, so go land prices in the upper Midwest. Here's a look at that remarkable rise in land values:   
 It's certainly true that land prices are still fantastically high by historic standards, but keep in mind that that drop on the far right took place in just one year. The big question now is how much that drop continues. A couple of years ago, it was common to hear fears about another land price bubble, like the one that popped in the   and devastated many farmers. This is, of course, a story much bigger and more important than any reality show, and far bigger than any farmer's impressive net worth. As land prices fall across Iowa and other parts of the upper Midwest, it hurts farmers, even those who aren't trying to sell their land. And that's because farmers use land to secure loans to grow their operations or buy necessities like machinery. When your land drops in value, so does your ability to grow — or even maintain — your operation. Fears of a popping farmland bubble aren't entirely gone — corn prices are at around $3.80 a bushel right now, less than half their  .  In an earlier version of this piece I conflated net worth and total land value. A farmer will own a million dollars worth of land but quite often have debt that reduces his or her net worth to well below a million dollars. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 