Washington DC wants to host the 2024 Olympics. It's a terrible idea.
Olympic fever has seized Washington, DC. Mayor Muriel Bowser   the city to bid for the 2024 Summer Olympics. At least one member of Congress, Rep. Jason Chaffetz (R-UT) supports the idea. And most voters seem to agree, judging by a They should all stop and think twice. Hosting the Olympics is a terrible idea for most cities. And it's very likely a terrible idea for Washington DC. Matheson's argument is a fairly nuanced one. There's nothing inherently bad about hosting the Olympics. In theory, Washington DC might be able to do so at a reasonable cost — and avoid the   in the winter of 2014. But in practice, reasonableness rarely prevails. The International Olympic Committee hasn't historically favored cities that pledge to do things cheaply. "The bids that make economic sense are the bids have no chance of winning," is how Matheson put it to me. "And the bid that will end up winning won't make economic sense." The evidence is compelling. Back in 2013, Matheson and Robert Baumann   studying the experiences of cities that hosted "mega-sporting events" in the past. They found that the costs tend to skyrocket, the economic upside was negligible, and the cities that have benefited seem to be special exceptions. That said, there  some evidence that hosting mega-sporting events makes people a bit happier. So not all is lost.   
 Bird's Nest, Beijing. Francisco Diez/Moment/Getty Images DC residents might look around and think, hey, it wouldn't be  hard to host the Summer Olympics on a budget. There are already plenty of hotels, good transportation networks, and sports facilities in DC and Baltimore. Why not just take advantage of those? The big problem here, Matheson and Baumann observe, is that the International Olympics Committee has rarely awarded the Olympics to cities that try to skimp on costs. The committee hasn't usually been thrilled about holding track events held in fields built two decades ago — they'd prefer a shiny new stadium. And if DC doesn't build it, a competing city probably will. " Indeed, it's telling that the one city in recent times that kept costs down was Los Angeles in 1984. That's because LA was the only city seriously bidding that year (others had been scared off by Montreal's experience with the 1976 Olympics, which left the city staggering under $1.5 billion in debt). This allowed Los Angeles to dictate its terms and make heavy use of existing infrastructure like the Rose Bowl. Alas, DC likely  Now, it's possible that the bidding process could become more reasonable in the future than it has in the past. The International Olympic Committee is now trying to revamp the process for the 2024 Olympics —   to tailor their bids to their own needs rather than adhere to strict IOC guidelines. (These reforms came after too many cities were scared away from hosting the 2022 Winter Olympics.) These new reforms could help tamp down on the insanity, but that's not yet certain. It might be prudent for cities like DC to wait and see whether the committee really has changed things up. By the way, there are plenty of ideas for reforming this selection process even more drastically. Some onlookers   that the International Olympic Committee should simply pick 4 or 5 cities to host the Olympics in perpetuity, on a rotating basis. That could help keep costs down, as these cities could reuse their fields and stadiums and other infrastructure. But that's not on the table right now.   
 Viewed from a tourist boat on the Thames, we see Tower Bridge decorated with the Olympic Rings in 2012, just before the London Games began. (Apexphotos/Moment/Getty Images) Of course, some extra spending on the Olympics might be worthwhile if these big sporting events gave a jolt to the economy. But there's little evidence for this.  But there's another more worrisome possibility: Perhaps all those eager sports fans crowd out other businesses. The two economists note that London actually saw an overall drop in international visitors when it hosted the 2012 Summer Olympics, possibly because other tourists stayed away. That's a cautionary tale for DC, which has a vibrant tourism economy. Worse still, many cities end up building out redundant infrastructure. "An airport, transportation network, or number of hotel rooms that is the right size for three weeks of tourist insanity may be extensively overbuilt for the post-event period," they write. "For example, two major luxury hotels built for the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, filed for bankruptcy shortly after the close of the Games."   
 The Olympic rings are set on the pitch during the opening ceremony of the XXVth Summer Olympics 25 July 1992 at Montjuic Stadium. (Michael Gangne/AFP/Getty Images) Now, to be fair, there are a few cities that have benefited from hosting the Olympics. But those are exceptions. Los Angeles in 1984 got a good deal — but, again, it was the sole serious bidder that year, something that hasn't really happened since. (Though, who knows, if enough cities  , it could happen again.) Another beneficiary was Barcelona, which hosted the Summer Olympics in 1992. Yes, its Olympic Park sits lonely and largely unused these days. But the city seemed to get a boost in reputation. "Before 1992, Barcelona had been overshadowed by Madrid, Rome, Paris, etc. They could essentially use Olympics as advertising, to put the city on the map," Matheson said. But don't expect Washington DC to get a similar boost: " There's one last twist here. Baumann and Matheson do note that it's probably better if a rich country hosts the Olympics than a poorer nation — given all the negative impacts. H   
 Just think, this could be us. (John Lamparski/WireImage/Getty Images) Mind you, there's more to life than dollars and cents.  So there's that. Residents of Washington DC might derive some pride and joy from hosting the Olympics. That's no small thing. Just don't expect too many other positives to come of it. This post draws on interviews/research I did   on this topic, though it's been updated to reflect a few current events (like the news that the IOC wants to change the selection process). Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 