6 impossible tightropes we ask working women to walk
Except that's not exactly true — particularly for women. What he seemed to be saying was what many women, and workers in general, know isn't true: that the workplace is a meritocracy, where whatever brownie points women have (silently) amassed can eventually be redeemed for rewards — like pay and respect commensurate with what your otherwise-equal male peers receive. Rather, the Nadella incident highlighted a contradiction that women often face at work, as the New York Times' Claire Cain Miller   — that negotiation can help, or it can backfire. Scholarly research and common-sense advice in fact point to all sorts of contradictions that women can face at work. Carnegie Mellon University's Linda Babcock   in a 2003 book that when graduate students negotiated for their first jobs out of school, they received much higher salaries — on average, $4,000 higher — regardless of gender. However, the men were far more likely to negotiate than the women. Babcock and co-authors also   in a 2005 study that negotiating can in fact hurt women. Subjects were asked to evaluate job candidates of both sexes who either negotiated or didn't negotiate for more pay. Subjects both deemed women who negotiated less hirable than the men who did so and also were less likely to say they'd want to work with those women. The authors write "perceptions of niceness and demandingness" were a key reason for this.  Women and minorities can get boosts in areas like career advice and promotions by getting sponsors — people to advocate for them at the office — according to a 2010   published in the Harvard Business Review. A recent   from the University of Colorado, focusing on executives, found that women and minorities who advocate for fellow women and minorities were penalized for perceived "selfishness." There are also cases where women need to find the safe middle ground between two extremes. Plenty of women already knew this, but a   from women's advocacy organization Catalyst found that survey respondents often perceived women leaders as either too soft or too tough. In addition, survey respondents tended to see women as competent or likable — but rarely both at the same time. Wearing makeup to work can make a woman seem more competent, likable, and trustworthy than if she's bare-faced,   to a 2011  . But the research — sponsored by Proctor & Gamble (manufacturer of Cover Girl cosmetics) but designed and executed by academics — also found that those positive effects decline as women wear heavier makeup. And then there is the research that flies in the face of logic. Yes, of course you should.  An experiment from the London Business School   that volunteers who had traditional ideas about gender roles evaluated women applicants with better credentials more harshly than less qualified men. That's a very specific scenario, but it does suggest that perhaps in some male-dominated or old-fashioned industries, women will have a tougher time of it. Again, this one seems obvious.  Trying to create an office that's a meritocracy can in fact make for more bias, MIT researchers   in a 2010 study. The researchers had business school students make compensation decisions for a fictional company, given the company's core values. In the institution that emphasized fairness toward employees based on their accomplishments among its core values, participants tended to reward men far more than women.   
 Source:  "They seemingly contradict each other but it's coming from the same source. The sense that women are bounded by the double bind," says Youngjoo Cha, an assistant professor of sociology at Indiana University who studies gender differences at work. In one of her recent studies, she found that the increasing trend toward "overwork" — long hours at the office — is helping exacerbate the pay gap. Many of the problems that women face, she adds, are the result of descriptive stereotypes — perceptions of what women are typically like — and prescriptive stereotypes — what women should be like. The ideas that women tend to be emotional and should be warm and caring, for example, can work against them. So how do you change those stereotypes? "Gender norms, stereotypes — there are very limited things that individuals can do to eradicate and crack this system. It's pretty much well established," she says, but adds that people seem to change their minds when they see women in charge. "T And data suggests that this is true. In the Gallup data, people who work for women bosses tend to prefer working for a woman boss, while the opposite is true for people who work for men. It's true that people may be self-select into these groups, but it's easy to see why people might change their minds after having a female boss. Indeed,  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 