Abercrombie, Delia's, Aeropostale: all your old favorite stores are in big trouble
All the places where 16-year-old you bought faux-beaten-up jeans and flannel shirts are fading fast.  What happened to all your old favorite mall haunts? Here are four trends that helped bring them all down. Teens are just spending less on themselves these days. According to this data from the University of Michigan's Institute for Social Research, the amount that teens spend on themselves has slowly tailed off since the late 1980s.   
 Source:  Those lines represent the share of high school seniors who say they spend half or more of their money on different categories. That slow decline of general spending on themselves (the top line, with the Xs through it) is one sign that teens are just less into shopping than they once were — the recession may have simply made our teenagers  .   
 Source:  "Abercrombie's model of $100 jeans and all its logo merchandise was a very high benchmark for most consumers to justify spending long-term, especially post-recession," he says. Meanwhile, cheaper "fast fashion" clothing options started growing aggressively. "F As that above chart shows, one area where teen spending has grown steadily, even while clothing has fallen off, is electronics. Many teens care more about having fashionable electronic accessories now than high-fashion clothing, as Rachel Harris and Elizabeth Abrams   in the New York Times earlier this year. "Apparel is very discretionary and younger consumers aren't as fixated on apparel as previous generations were," says Perkins. "They're spending more on data plans, cable, internet, smartphones, tablets, those types of things, and apparel has become somewhat secondary." This saps money away from clothing in two ways. One, it gets teens spending on electronics, and two, they need wifi on which to operate their gadgets, as the Times  . Wander around a city and where does wifi exist? Restaurants. That may be one reason why spending on food has spiked — teens hang out at restaurants more in order to be able to use their new Androids. In the last three years alone, foot traffic at malls has fallen by nearly half, according to this data from Shoppertrak and the Wall Street Journal.   
 Source:  There are a number of theories behind the demise of the shopping mall: less disposable income for many consumers, particularly low- and middle-income consumers, has hurt malls that cater to those sets. Malls  by luxury stores are surviving, while those anchored by mid-priced stores like JCPenney are flagging. In addition, t   
 Source: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 