Why oil prices are dropping down to $50 per barrel
The price of oil keeps falling and falling and falling.  I previously wrote   for why oil prices are plummeting, but you can get a short version from   by the International Energy Agency. The supply of oil keeps growing — thanks in large part to the US shale boom. Yet demand for oil keeps sagging, due to weak growth in Asia and Europe.   
 ( ) This wasn't always the case. Between 2010 and 2014, oil consumption was rising steadily, but global oil production was struggling to keep up. Stockpiles were getting drawn down. That led to higher oil prices — around $100 per barrel — which spurred drillers in the US to   from shale formations in places like North Dakota and Texas. But that boom was partly offset by conflicts in oil nations like Libya and Iraq. Since mid-2014, however, things have shifted. US oil production  . Russia, Iraq, and Canada keep producing more oil too. Just as important, global oil demand  , especially as economic growth in China and Europe have been slowing down. OPEC also played a role: at one point in November, onlookers thought that Saudi Arabia might cut back on its production to prop up prices. But the Saudis   and have signaled that they won't make any cuts for the time being. End result? Oil traders expect that the supply of oil will remain plentiful for the foreseeable future, while demand will remain weak — which is exactly what that IEA chart shows. And, since the price of oil is determined  , these expectations for the future matter a lot. That's why oil prices keep falling. A lot of day-to-day price movements are related to this basic dynamic. On January 5, prices started falling yet again. Why? Because new data   that oil exports from Russia and Iraq were hitting record highs. And, even though lower prices may eventually kill some costly shale-drilling projects in the United States, overall US oil production   in 2015. That expected increase in production has been enough to offset the news of fresh conflict in Libya (which is taking a smaller amount of oil off the market). In the meantime, few analysts expect growth to pick up in Europe or China or Japan anytime soon. So global demand is expected to remain sluggish in the near future. --   — and throwing the world into turmoil -- What the   means for America -- Driving in the US has been declining for years. Will  ? -- How   to throttle the US shale boom? -- A look at North Dakota's efforts  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 