Minneapolis has a surprisingly simple plan to cut traffic and make housing more affordable
For a long time in Minneapolis, almost everyone who wanted to build a new apartment complex was required to add one parking spot for every unit in the building — whether or not residents wanted one. There was an exception for a small area downtown, but not for outlying neighborhoods served by  . And all these unneeded or unwanted parking spots would   as they sat empty. This sort of minimum parking requirement is the law in  .   ########  BEGIN SNIPPET  ########   Now, however, Minneapolis's City Council has   for many new buildings. Small or midsize buildings that are within walking distance (specifically, a quarter-mile) of a rail or bus line no longer have to build any off-street parking at all. Large buildings (those with 50 or more units) now only have to provide one space for every two units. It's not perfect, but it's a huge step in the right direction — and one that other cities nationwide should follow if they care about providing affordable housing or reducing traffic.   
 (David McNew/Getty Images) Cities originally created minimum parking requirements because they didn't want residents' cars clogging up street parking. Mandating the construction garages or off-street lots would ensure that didn't happen. But in practice, parking is an urban real estate amenity that responds to demand just as well as, say, fitness centers or pools. If residents are looking for buildings with parking, developers are free to provide it — and even though the requirement was eliminated in downtown Minneapolis years ago, most developers  . But a strict requirement means that every building has to include parking whether residents want it or not. Typically, the cost of that parking then gets built into the rent. It might not seem like a big deal, but in Washington, DC, the underground spots many developers use to comply with these requirements each   to build. This makes housing less affordable — especially for low-income residents who are   in the first place. It also subsidizes driving, spurring further development that's based around the car, such as stores that provide free parking, effectively building its cost into the price of their goods. "The worst thing that many American cities have done, for low-income people, is create a world in which you   a car," retired UCLA economist  . "Parking pushes everything farther apart, and even if you're too poor to own a car, you have to pay for all the free parking you don't use."   
 Downtown Buffalo, New York, a city that's recently   due to excess parking. ( ) There's also some evidence that free parking  , increasing traffic. One Finally, parking requirements often end up wasting valuable space on unnecessary empty lots and garages, hurting cities as a whole. A   that for each parking spot — taking up space that could otherwise be occupied by a taxpaying business — the city of Hartford gives up about $1,200 in tax revenue annually, for a total loss of $50 million. In some cities,   have been given over to surface lots in order to comply with these requirements. All of which is to say: Minneapolis, like a handful of other cities, is taking a very positive step in relaxing its parking requirements. What it really needs to do is eliminate them entirely. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 