Does an engineer look like this? Yes.
What does an engineer look like? Isis Anchalee is a platform engineer at a company called OneLogin who appeared in a recruiting ad for her company. The ad sparked some sexist social media commentary from people who implied that this actual image of an actual woman who is an actual engineer was not a plausible "image of what a female engineer looks like." She launched the  hashtag   in response to show that women who are also engineers look like ... women. Isis Anchalee wrote on  : "This is literally just  , an example of   engineer at OneLogin." Does this look like an engineer?  . Anchalee, who is also an engineer,  : "I’m just a human and I prefer to keep my life simple/reserved, but it blows my mind that my fully-clothed smiling face with unbrushed hair and minimal makeup on a white wall is seemingly more controversial in some communities than this simply because of my gender." Software Engineer developing simulations    
 
 Oh hey,     cc    
 
               My mom, Perl hacker, 20+ years sys analyst. Nuclear physicist. Started coding on punch cards!    
 
  to 3 {autism, T1 Diabetes, & Tethered Spinal Cord} Ops, Infrastructure, Full Stackaroni    
 
 Basically, every time you input text in Windows there are a bunch of women behind it all!    
 
 I run the npm registry.    
 
 i'm a motorcycle babe and i design the network sowtware that works    
 
  software developer at a major record label         
 
 Deborah is a     & BioEng   student researching osteochondral repair!      
 
 I build awesome things    
 
        cc    
 
 Just a few of the faces we've seen around   College of Engineering at our campuses.    
 
 IntelUK: What do   engineers look like? This.    
 
  because I happen to be a Signalling engineer. Now mind the closing doors...  
 
  - software engineer staff for aviation and pride lead  !      
 
 When I say I'm a Network Engineer: "oh right so you're smart too" as if it's a big compliment.    
 
 I help build product people need. Smile a Lot and love nappy hair!        
 
 LOVELOVELOVE this!    
 
 Hello, engineers! I made a Twitter photo generator to share your   pride:    In case you're not sure if you look like an engineer, check out Alisha Ramos's   generator and see for yourself. 
 
 Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 