The real Amazon scandal has nothing to do with its white-collar workers
A new report by the   paints Amazon as a  . Some examples the piece documents are truly egregious. A woman with breast cancer was threatened with firing because "difficulties" in her "personal life" had interfered with her work, as was a woman who recently endured a stillbirth. Another woman was forced out after years of high performance marks because she visited her sick father too often. Even Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos has acknowledged those cases are unacceptable, and   encouraging them to report treatment like that to HR.   ########  BEGIN SNIPPET  ########   But as bad as those anecdotes are, the piece describes an office that is nonetheless far, far preferable to the other workplaces Amazon runs: its warehouses. , a daily paper in Allentown, Pennsylvania, described the local Amazon warehouse in 2011 as constantly overheated, with temperatures of more than 100 degrees during summer heat waves. After a federal investigation into conditions, the company started keeping an emergency vehicle with paramedics outside the warehouse to handle cases of heatstroke. An emergency room doctor who treated some of the warehouse's workers reported Amazon for unsafe work conditions. Apart from the heat, the warehouses paid little ($11 to $12 an hour) and imposed extremely strict discipline on employees. They used a point-based system wherein missed work, not working fast enough, or breaking safety rules earned a worker points, and employees with too many points were fired. Sick employees had to bring in doctor's notes and request medical waivers if they didn't want to get points. "When the heat index exceeded 110, they'd give you voluntary time off," former worker Robert Rivas told Soper. "If you wanted to go home, they'd send you home. But if you didn't have a doctor's note saying you couldn't work in the heat, you'd get points." In 2012, after Soper's exposé, Amazon installed   at its warehouses at a cost of $52 million — not insignificant a firm with  . But conditions still aren't  . Amazon is currently under federal investigation after   in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. It had already been investigated after a worker died in a sorting facility it owned in New Jersey, but ultimately wasn't cited. As of this year, Amazon still  . Warehouse employees still have to sign   that potentially limit their ability to work at retail outlets selling similar goods to Amazon. Workers aren't unionized, and   by equipment technicians and mechanics to join the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers in January. In 2013, a   in Wales and found himself walking 11 miles over the course of a 10 1/2-hour shift; he was expected to handle a new order every 33 seconds. Warehouse workers still have to endure long security screenings when leaving the facilities, time for which they are not compensated (  to avoid paying for time spent in security lines); the screenings restrict lunch breaks so much that a group of employees has   alleging the practice breaks federal wage and hour laws. And the strict discipline that Soper described has endured. In 2013, the   reported that one employee had a shift canceled after he took a day off because of blisters he'd developed on the job. An aerial view of Amazon's warehouse in Hemel Hempstead, England, on December 5, 2014. Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images To be clear: The problems with white-collar worker treatment cited in Kantor and Streitfeld's article are real (and Streitfeld, to his credit, has   at   as well). Disciplining workers for getting cancer is horrible. But white-collar Amazon workers are also typically paid high wages, due to Amazon's need to compete with other firms offering lucrative compensation for talented programmers. If they don't like Amazon's work culture, it's very likely there's another firm that will hire them that offers a more relaxed environment. The tech job market is very tight, and while Amazon's coders shouldn't   to leave to enjoy work-life balance, exit is still a viable option. Exit is not, generally, a viable option for warehouse employees: $11 an hour is not a competitive wage; generally the only people taking these jobs lack the credentials or skills necessary for more lucrative jobs and are taking positions at Amazon because it's the only work they can get. The alternative to working in a warehouse is, quite possibly, unemployment. So it's a little rich to see people like best-selling author John Green canceling their Amazon Prime subscriptions due to the company's treatment of its   workers:   This NYT story by   made me cancel my Amazon Prime subscription. Worst cult ever. Inside Amazon:    
 
 It's fine to be mad about how Amazon treats workers. But let's not forget the workers who are truly getting screwed. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 