Greek crisis: Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras resigns and calls new elections
Greek politics is back in the headlines this week. After Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras signed a controversial austerity deal with European leaders earlier this summer, he faced a left-wing rebellion that cost him his parliamentary majority. That created a political crisis for Tsipras and his Cabinet, so he's calling for new elections on September 20. If you're tired of reading about Greece versus Germany and eurozone debt considerations, never fear — this almost certainly does   represent a resurgence of a Europe-wide political crisis. Quite the reverse. All signs are that the election will completely marginalize the Greek left,   the old establishment political parties, making Tsipras the absolute master of the scene and giving him freedom to implement the deal. Sure. In brief: As you might expect, abandoning all of Syriza's main campaign pledges was somewhat controversial inside the party. Many Syriza leaders, especially those associated with the inter-party group called the Left Platform, opposed the pirouette. The terms of the agreement between Greece and its creditors require various parliamentary votes to implement various changes. This week, enough Syriza MPs began defecting that Tsipras could only secure a majority for his proposals by relying on votes from the center-right New Democracy party. In Greece's parliamentary system, that made Tsipras's position untenable, so he has called for new elections. Quite the opposite! To many foreign observers, Tsipras's tenure in office has been a complete catastrophe. He's   but secured none of the benefits. He put Europe through months of wrangling and the Greek economy through a terrifying week of near-collapse, all just to secure a deal he could have had in February. He's broken all his campaign pledges, and seemingly abandoned the agenda that made him popular in the first place. But Syriza is enjoying an   over New Democracy, and  .   September snap election could look very bad for the Left: Left Platform will be pushed from party lists, hard to be viable outside party too   
 
 Unless something changes dramatically in the next month, new elections should cement his status as Greece's dominant political figure. Dissident Syriza MPs will be purged from Syriza's electoral lists and replaced with loyalists. The dissidents don't have nearly enough time to organize a new political party. The mainstream parties Syriza crushed in January will be crushed again.   3 Tsipras' problem remains implementation. But elections won't make that worse. May even make it better by paving way for reshuffle   
 
 Even better, the brief dissolution of parliament will give Tsipras the chance to reshuffle his Cabinet to ensure a new team that is loyal to him and prepared to implement the deal. There seem to be three main factors underlying Tsipras's dominance of the political scene. The vote is on September 20. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 