Germany is imperiling the world economy by refusing to accept free money
The German government should go spend a bunch of money on something. Ideally a critically useful infrastructure project,   — but failing that, even a pretty blah project would be good. Or if Germany can't think of anything worth spending money on, it should enact a large cut in its national sales tax. How to pay for it? Easy. Don't. Because the weirdest story in the economics world just keeps getting weirder. 
 
 German 10-year bond yield to go negative, says Citi. Targets -0.05%, vs current record low 0.15%. Right now on the European continent there are several countries, including Germany and Finland, that have sold bonds that pay negative interest rates. In other words, you give the Finnish government 1,000 euros today and several years later they give you back fewer than 1,000 euros. This is an extraordinary event, the impact of which has been somewhat blunted by the fact that for years now some government bonds have traded at negative   rates. That means the rate of interest charged is less than the projected rate of inflation, giving governments the opportunity to essentially borrow for free. That's an unusual situation, but it's always been clearly something that might happen every so often. What's playing out right now where some governments are selling bonds at negative nominal rates — and a much larger group including Netherlands, Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, and Austria have seen bonds trade at negative rates in the secondary market — is considerably weirder. Indeed, the interest rate situation in Europe is so strange that until quite recently, it was thought to be entirely impossible. There was a lot of economic theory built around the problem of the   — the impossibility of sustained negative interest rates. Some economists wanted to   to eliminate the lower bound problem. Paul Krugman wrote a lot of columns about it. One of them said, "The zero lower bound isn't a theory, it's a fact, and it's a fact that we've been facing for five years now." Well, think about it. A bond with a negative interest rate is a guaranteed money-loser. Why would you buy one if you can just hold cash instead? The traditional view has always been that no one would. People thought the interest rate on bonds couldn't fall below zero because at that point people will just hold on to their money. Well, back in January But here's the catch. The Eurozone has one central bank — the European Central Bank — but there's no consolidated Eurozone debt, no "eurobonds." So when the ECB goes out and buys bonds, it needs to buy the bonds of its member states — a little Belgium, a dollop of Portugal, a smattering of Finland, a dose of Italy, etc. But one consequence of the   is that people think the Eurozone might break up. If the Eurozone does break up, you're going to be way better off owning the debt of a rich and stable country like Germany than the debt of a country like Spain that's much poorer and facing an  . So whatever the interest rate on Spanish bonds, the rate on German bonds is sure to be lower. In other words, if the ECB takes steps to make Spanish interest rates really low, then the interest rate on more creditworthy Eurozone countries has to go below zero. That is the real mystery. The mechanics of pushing interest rates down are easy to see.  The main practical short-term takeaway is that Germany (and other smaller creditworthy European nations) is hurting both itself and the world economy by declining to run a larger budget deficit. As Ben Bernanke explained in a recent blog post,   is a problem for the global economy because it means Germans aren't buying enough stuff to create job opportunities for non-Germans. When German politicians hear their surplus criticized, they typically become defensive and say it's absurd to blame them for manufacturing great products that the world wants to buy. But the issue isn't what Germany sells to the world, it's how little Germany  . What's more, fixing the problem requires absolutely zero sacrifice on Germany's part. What the world needs from Berlin is for Germany to buy itself a bunch of nice shiny new transportation and energy infrastructure, or else for Germany to give itself a huge tax cut. Not only would shiny new projects and lower taxes be fun, but the message of the negative interest rates story is that by borrowing more money   Germany will improve its long-term fiscal situation. For the USA, the main implication is that back in 2009 and 2010 the Federal Reserve made a mistake. All the objective economic metrics at the time said the "right" interest rate to curb unemployment would be negative. But negative interest rates are impossible! The Fed tried a few tricks to get around that problem, and also told Congress to try fiscal stimulus as a workaround. The implication of the European experience, however, is that the Fed could have generated negative interest rates through a mix of Quantitative Easing and negative interest rates. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 