Leaked documents reveal HSBC was helping a lot of people cheat on their taxes
A few years back, I went on a junket to Switzerland on which I met a bunch of Swiss businesspeople including, naturally, several Swiss bankers. Over dinner one of them told me that he was saddened by the negative stereotypes of Swiss banking secrecy that prevailed in the United States. People, he told me, think of Swiss banks as helping drug smugglers or terrorists launder money. The truth is simpler. "There are many wealthy people in the world," he told me, "and they prefer not to pay taxes." That is the basic message of a huge trove of documents that were leaked from the British bank HSBC's Swiss arm to journalists from The Guardian, Le Monde, BBC Panorama and the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. You can  , but suffice it to say that while there's no al-Qaeda here there's an   of tax evasion. And not just in the sense that foreigners would use Swiss bank accounts to facilitate tax avoidance. HSBC Switzerland personnel were actively involved in helping clients formulate plans to dodge paying what they owed. It goes on and on. Some of it relates to matters that have already been prosecuted in the tax dodger's home country, and some of it relates to matters that perhaps should be prosecuted in the future. The real point, however, is the one my Swiss banking friend related to me back in the fall of 2008: bankers in Switzerland saw helping rich foreigners evade taxes as part of the job. They didn't think it was wrong, morally or legally, so they did it regularly and almost casually. If people were hiding money to arm ISIS, that might be wrong. But dodging taxes wasn't breaking the rules,  . For a quantitative look at this problem,   is indispensable. He shows that as inequality as risen in the United States there's been an exponential increase in the amount of money squirreled away in offshore tax havens:   
 Zucman also finds that while offshore wealth holdings are on the rise in the USA, they are more common in Europe, and even more common in Latin America and Africa. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 