3 ways companies are going about hiring all wrong
For many American job-seekers, the basic steps of applying for work look roughly the same: you find the posting, write the cover letter, tweak the resume, email the PDFs (not Word documents — good heavens, never Word documents), and if you're lucky, you get a phone interview. And then maybe you interview in person, and then maybe again. And maybe it's three or four interviews in a row, possibly with a panel of interviewers, and you maintain a stiff, pleasant smile through the whole ordeal.  One piece of evidence is a recent study published in the   that finds doing just one interview per candidate is often better than more (and is almost always better than two). The reason is deceptively simple. Assuming the firm knows its employees well and puts in enough effort on hiring, it would choose someone relatively experienced and who knows the company well to interview new candidates — maybe someone who has picked good workers in the past. Let's call this relatively experienced person Katie, and let's assume she has the best track record at her company of picking good candidates.  Even if the second interviewer were specifically trained to correct for Katie's misses and picked up the two people Katie missed, it would tend to result in a lower hit rate than Katie's alone. This is because the second interviewer would have been trained to be Katie's complement — that's different from being all-around better at picking targets than she is. "Adding more interviewers under various conditions will not help you," says Mario Fific, an assistant professor of psychology at Grand Valley State University and one of the study's authors.  The trick, of course, is in firms finding those good interviewers. But once that master interviewer is identified, a firm may have to add far more interviewers into the mix in order to improve over just that one interviewer alone. If Katie is moderately good, it could take four or more interviewers to surpass her hit rate, and if she's a strong interviewer, the panel might have to be as big as 10.  It's not just multiple interviews extending that hiring time; it's all sorts of new tactics employers are using to try to single out the best workers. One area where employers are increasingly getting unorthodox is interview questions. Firms are going beyond  But do they work? Those sorts of questions can help an employer tease out the true personality of a candidate who might otherwise give bland, canned answers. And as   recently reported, unorthodox tests and questions can help determine whether a candidate would do well in a particularly demanding or emotionally taxing job, like working with angry customers at a call center. But as far as upping the "hit rate" goes, subjective questions — particularly in areas like personality tests — can be limiting, particularly if a company is looking for a very particular answer, says one hiring expert. "There are some companies that do that specifically until they find someone that fits the mold in which they've chosen," says Peter McChesney, co-principal and vice president at Palmer Legal Staffing in Washington, DC. "I McChesney's firm specializes in finding office support, legal, and management candidates for firms in the area.  "They won't even see the candidate, and it's based just on the piece of paper we've sent them," he says. "Whereas we've already vetted [the candidates]." That points to the kind of uncertainty inherent in the hiring process. The way he sees it, it makes no sense for an employer to pay his firm lots of money to seek out candidates, only to second-guess the firm's decisions after all that vetting based on one page. That employer, of course, has its own particular views about what it wants, even if it has hired someone to help them staff up. This is why McChesney thinks the wave of the future is in video resumes, which give an employer can get a quick snapshot of the type of person behind a resume. "I believe that over time you will see people that send their resume with a video. It's something that we're looking into doing, and that is looking at giving a snapshot video with resumes, because then you are seeing someone," he says. So what's a firm to do, aside from asking for Youtube clips? One of the biggest is to be totally candid with potential hires. A   
 ( ) But all this evidence also suggests that frustrated jobseekers who can't seem to make it past the interview can take heart; the people looking at the  Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 