How Dove went from moisturizing to patronizing
It can be hard to remember, but at one point, Dove just sold soap. Plain, uncontroversial soap that didn't come with any ideological baggage. Fast forward to today, when you have to sit through three minutes of one of the company's viral ads before a brand name shows up (and the products sometimes are never even seen). How did Dove go from a soap to a brand that makes you love your body? It's not exactly that Dove suddenly cared about women crafting healthy body images. Rather, that new branding was part of a corporation-wide growth strategy to give brands distinct identities, rather than having them simply stand for products, In 2000, Dove parent company Unilever crafted a strategy plan called the "Path to Growth," in which it cut down 1,600 brands to 400, according to a   from HBS Professor John Deighton.  In other words, Dove would now make the jump from being just a soap to being a brand that covered all sorts of products: shampoo, conditioner, deodorant, and so on. And that jump into lotion and hair mousse is why Dove became synonymous with "real" women posing in their undies. No longer could Dove simply advertise itself as the best moisturizing soap on the market. And instead of trying to craft a complicated brand image that simultaneously made the company appear to be the best at hair care, skin care, and controlling body odor, Unilever decided to take a different tack. "Unilever decided, instead, that Dove should stand for a point of view," Deighton writes. All that was left to do was figure out what, exactly, Dove's point of view would be. Dove's global brand director, Silvia Lagnado, found it when her research found that women worldwide were discontent with the way "young, white, blonde, and thin" were constantly equated with beauty. After consulting with leading experts in psychiatry and women's views of beauty, Dove honed its message and found a new niche: advertising to "real women." Soon, unconventionally pretty ladies were all over the advertising, telling the world about the very real tragedy of women not believing they were beautiful. Dove has ridden the Campaign for Real Beauty wave for around a decade now, but there are signs that people are growing disenchanted. The company's 2013 "Real Beauty Sketches" ad was one advertisement that drew consumer backlash. The   that women need to have more confidence in their looks, critics say, is that it still upholds the idea that  , albeit in a warm and fuzzy way. In the sketches ad,  , it's clear that the (mostly white and slender) women subjects equate beauty with being even more slender, not to mention younger. Dove, of course, isn't the only company that has taken criticism for selling products by using a woman-friendly message. Pantene's "Labels Against Women" ad suffered   from consumers who saw it as manipulative. And Goldieblox, a toy company that says it sells   likewise raised questions about the  . For his part, Deighton doesn't believe Dove has overplayed the real beauty hand just yet. To him, the ads are "sanctimonious and lachrymose, yes, and eventually it will wear out, but I see no evidence that we've reached that point," he says in an email. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 