Can you answer these 5 basic questions that predict investment success?
Want to know if you're getting the most out of your  ? Time for a pop quiz: 
 
 
 
 How you fared may be a sign of how well you can expect your retirement investments will do. In a   released earlier this year by the NBER, North Carolina State's Robert Clark, George Washington University's Annamaria Lusardi, and the University of Pennsylvania's Olivia Mitchell found a correlation between people's scores on this test and how well their 401(k)s perform. They examined data on employees of a large financial institution with more than 20,000 employees. The researchers sent them a survey asking five questions about finance and got nearly 2,800 responses: Respondents' abilities to answer those five questions turned out to be significantly linked to how well their 401(k)s performed.  While 1.3 percent might sound like a small margin, it's a huge difference when you calculate it out over a few decades. The authors figure that after 30 years of working, the most knowledgeable respondents will end up with retirement nest eggs that are 25 percent larger than the least knowledgeable respondents. That can be a huge difference, considering how much money most analysts  people save for retirement. These results suggest that if a lower-return person ends up with $600,000, a higher-return person will have $150,000 more by retirement. One of the biggest things that put the more knowledgeable people ahead was stock ownership. The highest-return people were more likely to pick stock index funds, while lower scorers chose more conservative (and therefore lower-return) funds. The basic gist is pretty unsurprising: better financial knowledge seems to make for better investments, the authors write.  But there's also good news here: the concepts in that quiz are fairly simple. Understanding the basics about risk and rates of return would allow a person to ace the quiz — and, presumably, make smarter investment choices. Lusardi and Mitchell in a   found that teaching people economics in school and giving them work-based financial education can also meaningfully improve their financial literacy. And there's room to do a better job of teaching these concepts. On the OECD's 2012 financial literacy test, American students were   when compared to other developed nations. Better education could easily make a nation of people who will be more secure in retirement.   Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 