This is the first licensed self-driving truck. There will be many more.
Last night at the Hoover Dam, the Freightliner company  : the first semi-autonomous truck to get a license to operate on public roads. The Inspiration is now licensed to drive autonomously on highways in Nevada. It works a bit like a plane's autopilot system: a driver will get the rig on the highway, and can take control at any time once it's there. But the truck will be able to drive itself at high speeds, using cameras to make sure it stays within its lane and doesn't get too close to the vehicle in front of it.   ########  BEGIN SNIPPET  ########   This isn't a full-fledged autonomous truck, but it's a crucial first step toward one. And though this event isn't getting nearly as much attention as   last year, there are good reasons to believe autonomous technology will transform the trucking industry much sooner than the private car.   
 The Inspiration Truck. ( ) There's one big reason why companies like Freightliner — as well as   — are investing in this sort of technology, and it's not good news for the  at its remote iron ore mines, partly because it's so expensive to get drivers to go live in those places. Freightliner says its new technology isn't meant to eliminate drivers — it's mainly intended to cut down on driver fatigue, reducing the frequency of accidents. But if it doesn't develop the technology to fully replace drivers, another company will.    
 ( ) Engineering a vehicle that can drive at a constant speed on a predictable highway is a much simpler problem than designing one that can drive on city streets, which are filled with traffic lights, pedestrians, and other sudden obstacles. That's the reason Google began is self-driving car program with experiments on highways. And the vast majority of long-haul truck miles are logged on the interstate system, making it a convenient industry to begin implementing driverless technologies — including some that are already used. Though Google's flashy car is getting the most press, you've probably already experienced semi-autonomous driving capabilities that have been rolled out in human-operated cars: things like   (which can slow you down if there's a car in front of you) and   if you begin drifting out of your lane. Inspiration's new truck , the same as Google's current cars.) But it's an incremental step toward a future truck that might be able to operate without a driver. A truck convoy experiment in Sweden. ( ) ( ) It's not safe for human drivers to draft off each other in this way, because it doesn't allow for enough reaction time if the truck in front stops suddenly. But computers can do it. Recently, a   have conducted experiments with a lead truck   showed that while traveling at 65 miles per hour 36 feet apart, two trucks packed together  . This was the average for just two trucks (the lead saved 4.5 percent, and the rear saved 10 percent), so it would increase as trains get longer.   ( ) The factors that block a broad rollout of self-driving trucks fall mainly into two categories. One is safety. People are understandably concerned about the idea of computers  But  , and these convoys may gradually get people used to the idea of autonomous trucks. The other problem is legal. Right now,   (including California, Nevada, and Florida, plus DC) have laws on the books regarding driverless cars, and their legal status as a whole is murky. For driverless trucking on interstates to be practical, all states would need to explicitly allow these vehicles on public roads. Advocates are hopeful that national legislation will solve this problem. It's all very uncertain, but in 2012, Google's Sergey Brin predicted the Department of Transportation would begin regulating autonomous vehicles nationally as early as 2017. And it seems likely that if self-driving cars were legalized, driverless trucks — which, though heavier, would mostly operate in a simpler, more controlled environment and would be exclusively owned and maintained by professional companies — would be allowed too. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 