The rise of the servantÂ economy
While the rise of these services means extra cash for people doing odd jobs, they also point to deeper, unsettling trends going on in the US economy. But the growth of TaskRabbit and other similar firms could mostly mean yet more job growth at the lower end of the spectrum. These low-skill jobs have made up the bulk of job growth over the last decade or so, as the Dallas Fed showed in a recent paper. While jobs fall out of the middle, new jobs are created at the top and bottom. And those jobs at the bottom tend to be "nonroutine manual" jobs: those that require few skills and little problem-solving. Many of these errand jobs fit this bill perfectly, involving deliveries and other rote tasks. These new errand jobs can feature high pay — Instacart, Manjoo noted, can pay $30 an hour. But a major problem is finding steady work — no grocery run takes eight hours. Journalists who have tried     have written that trying to cobble together enough jobs to make a real living can be virtually impossible. (That said, TaskRabbit   making some workers full-time temps.) A TaskRabbit makes a flower delivery to a lucky customer. One reason people are buying these services is because they want more time on their hands.  That wasn't always the case. As The Atlantic's Derek Thompson  , more education has only in the last few decades become synonymous with less leisure time. Source: The Atlantic And more education tends to mean more income. "The total hours of everyone else has not significantly increased, although there is a rise in non-standard hours, especially among many workers paid less — precisely the ones doing the drudgery chores [for companies like Taskrabbit and Washio]," he says. This is not to say that all of these new errand-running workers are low-educated; in fact, most of Taskrabbit's have college degrees. As   reported in 2013, 70 percent of the company's workers have at least a bachelor's degree. It seems that many people taking these jobs either have fallen on hard times or just want a little money on the side. But what may be happening with these new errand services is that those time-strapped, richer Americans who still have jobs have found a way to buy a bit of extra time. And they're buying it from the people who most need jobs — those with no work and lots of time on their hands. Get our newsletter in your inbox twice a week. 